LEffiNIZ AND THE KABBALAH

                            ALLISON P. COUDERT

                      LEIBNIZ AND THE KABBALAH

       Founding Directors: P. DiOOn (paris) and R.H. Popkin (Washington University,
                                       St. Louis & UCLA)
         Directors: Brian Copenhaver (University of California, Los Angeles, USA)
              Sarah Hutton (The University of Hertfordshire, United Kingdom),
        Richard Popkin (Washington University, St Louis & University of California,
                                       Los Angeles, USA),
   Editorial Board: J.F. Battail (paris); F. Duchesneau (Montreal); A. Gabbey (New York);
 T. Gregory (Rome); J.D. North (Groningen); MJ. Petry (Rotterdam); J. Popkin (Lexington);
                                      Th. Verbeek (Utrecht)
Advisory Editorial Board: J. Aubin (paris); A. Crombie (Oxford); H. Gadamer (Heidelberg);
H. Gouhier (paris); K. Hanada (Hokkaido University); W. Kirsop (Melbourne); P.O. Kristeller
     (Columbia University); E. Labrousse (paris); A. Lossky (Los Angeles); J. Malarczyk
      (Lublin); E. de Olaso (C.I.F. Buenos Aires); J. Orcibal (paris); W. ROd (Munchen);
 G. Rousseau (Los Angeles); H. Rowen (Rutgers University, N.J.); J.P. Schobinger (Zurich);
                                       J. Tans (Groningen)
     LEIBNIZ
     AND THE
    KABBALAH

           ALLISON P. COUDERT
      Arizona State University, Arizona, U.S.A.

SPRINGER-SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, B.V.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Coudert. Alllson. 1941Lelbnlz and the Kabbalah / by Al llson P. Coudert.
       p.   cm. -- (Archlves lnternatlonales d'hlstolre des ldees
  Internatlonal archlves of the hlstory of ldeas : 142)
    Includes blbllographlcal references and lndex.
    ISBN 978-90-481-4465-5          ISBN 978-94-017-2069-4 (eBook)
    DOI 10.1007/978-94-017-2069-4
    1. Lelbnlz. Gottfrled Wllhel •• Frelherr von. 1646-1716.
  2. Cabala--Hlstory--17th century. 3. Cabala and Chrlstlanlty-Hlstory--17th century.   I. Tltle. II. Serles: Archlves
  lnternatlonales d'hlstolre des ldees : 142.
  B2599.C33C68 1995
  296. 1 '6'092--dc20                                        94-32967

ISBN 978-90-481-4465-5

                                    Printed on acid-free paper

                                   All Rights Reserved
                     © 1995 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht
                 Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 1995
     No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or
             utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
         including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and
        retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner.
                         Table of Contents

Acknowledgements                                                 vii

A Preliminary Note on the Kabbalah                                ix

Leibniz and van Helmont: A Chronological Table                   Xlll

Introduction                                                       1

1. A Brief Historiography of Leibniz Studies                      15
2. Van Helmont, Leibniz, and the Kabbalah                         25
3. Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration    35
4. The Kabbalah and Monads                                        78
5. The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism                       99
6. The Kabbalah and Leibniz's Theodicy                           112
7. Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah                         136

Conclusion                                                       155

Notes                                                            158

Bibliography                                                     203

Index                                                            213

                                     v
                          Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the Herzog August Bibliothek in Wolfenbuttel for their
generous support which gave me the opportunity to complete my research
for this monograph. The manuscripts on which I base my arguments are to
be found in the Herzog August Bibliothek, the Niedersachsische Landesbibliothek in Hanover, and the British Library. I am extremely grateful to the
librarians in all these places for helping me locate manuscripts and obtain
microfilms. I am also grateful to two of my colleagues at Arizona State University, Taylor Corse and Anita Obermeier, who have given generously of
their time and knowledge to help me decipher and translate difficult portions
of these manuscripts. I would also like to thank the two anonymous readers of
the first version of this monograph for their helpful and insightful comments.
My final thanks go to my husband, Gordon Weiner, whose editorial skills
and encyclopedic knowledge of early modern European history and Jewish
history have made this a much better book than it might have been.
   I began thinking about this book twenty-five years ago when I was fortunate
enough to be a graduate student at the Warburg Institute with Frances Yates
and D. P. Walker as my tutors. Their profound erudition, combined with their
kindness to a student who had never heard of Renaissance occultism, much
less the Kabbalah, provided the foundation for this book. The actual book
would never have been written, however, without the support and encouragement of Richard H. Popkin. It is with deep appreciation and profound
gratitude that I dedicate this book to him.

                                     vii
               A Preliminary Note on the Kabbalah

Because the Kabbalah, and especially the Lurianic Kabbalah, is so central
to the arguments presented in this monograph, the reader should have some
idea of its history and basic doctrines. In what follows I give a rudimentary
sketch, referring the reader to the studies of Gershom Scholem, Ernst Benz,
and Moshe Idel, cited in the bibliography, for a comprehensive treatment of
the subject.
   The Kabbalah is the commonly used term for the mystical teachings of
Judaism, especially for those originating after the twelfth century. The Kabbalah was considered to be the esoteric and unwritten aspect of the divine
revelation granted to Moses on Mt. Sinai, while the Bible was simply the
written and exoteric portion of this same revelation. The word itself means
"that which is received" or "tradition," and it was generally believed that the
Kabbalah had passed orally from one generation to the next until the time
of Esdras when it was finally written down. The Kabbalah's reputed divine
origin led many Jews as well as Christians to view it as the purest source
of divine wisdom. They consequently scrutinized kabbalistic writings with
especial care, expecting to find in it the incontrovertible word of God.
   The two major sources ofkabbalistic thought available to Christians before
the seventeenth century were the Sefer Yezirah, or Book of Formation, written
some time between the third and sixth century C. E. and translated by Christian
Kabbalists during the Renaissance, and the Zohar, [The book ofl Splendor,
which was believed to have been written by Simeon ben Yohai in the second
century C. E., although it was actually a late thirteenth century forgery.
The Sefer Yezirah envisioned creation in terms of divine speech and the
manipulation of the Hebrew letters, which are described as the "gates" or
"roots" from which all things were formed. The Zohar is a collection of
treatises dealing with a wide range of topics, such as the creation, divine
revelation, biblical interpretation, physiognomy and chiromancy, the soul,
the world to come, the significance of the commandments, the mysteries of
the Hebrew language, and redemption.

                                      ix
x      Note on the Kabbalah

   In the sixteenth century a new form of Kabbalah appeared, the Lurianic Kabbalah, derived from the teachings of Isaac Luria, who was born in
Jerusalem of German parents in 1534 and died an acclaimed "zaddik," or
holy man, in 1572. Luria spent a quiet life and three very important years at
Safed surrounded by a group of devoted followers who eagerly accepted the
astonishingly novel twists he gave to kabbalistic thought.
   Luria delighted in allegories, enigmas, and mysteries, which makes his
thought obscure and open to a wide variety of interpretations. He embraced an
essentially gnostic and neoplatonic view of creation in terms of the emanation
of divine light or the articulation of divine speech. Luria accepted the gnostic
idea that souls were sparks of light trapped and exiled in the material realm;
but he postulated an end to this exile when all souls would be redeemed,
together with their material "husks," and return to their pristine perfection
through the process of reincarnation. Luria was an animist. There was nothing
dead and devoid of soul in the Lurianic universe. Souls were in everything,
including stones, and every soul would become better and better until finally
freed from the cycle of birth and rebirth.
   The doctrines of reincarnation (gi/gul) and universal salvation, or restoration (tikkun), are the two most important aspects of Luria's thought and the
basis for an impregnable theodicy. By attributing the inequalities and misfortunes of life to the faults of previous existences, Luria reaffirmed a belief in
God's goodness and justice. Human beings were responsible for their own
sin and suffering; but God was merciful and granted every soul the necessary
time to complete the arduous process of redemption. A fundamental axiom of
the Lurianic Kabbalah was that human beings were entirely responsible for
redeeming themselves and the fallen world. As a result of human actions in
the form of tikkunim (positive redemptive acts) every individual contributed
to the restoration of the world to its original perfection. This idea was utterly
at odds with the orthodox Christian belief in original sin, predestination, and
the essential redemptive role of Christ. Although such a positive view of
man was heretical and smacked of Pelagianism, one of the major arguments
presented in this monograph is that this optimistic philosophy of universal
salvation found its way into Leibniz's mature theodicy.
   The roots of the Kabbala, especially in its Lurianic form, lay in those
strands of ancient Gnosticism which conceived of creation in terms of an
emanation from the God-head and salvation in terms of the return of all
created things to their original perfection in the God-head. There are therefore many similarities between the Kabbalah and Neoplatonism, which also
absorbed gnostic elements. These gnostic elements, especially the implicit
monism entailed in emanationism, were, however, antithetical to the orthodox Jewish and Christian view that there is an unbridgeable gulf between God
                                                 Note on the Kabbalah      xi

and his creatures. Consequently, the Kabbalists could be, and were, accused of
teaching the heretical doctrine of pantheism as well as that of perfectionism.
As I will suggest, Leibniz himself was not immune from the same charges.
However much he tried to guard against it, his monadology exhibits the kind
of spiritual monism characteristic of some forms of Gnosticism in general
and the Lurianic Kabbalah in particular.
   It is the purpose of this book to argue that for all its complexities the
Lurianic Kabbalah had a significant influence on Leibniz's thought. In making
this argument I am profoundly indebted to the work of Gershom Scholem,
whose analysis of the Kabbalah is the starting point for anyone interested
in the subject. The work of Moshe Idel is also invaluable for understanding
essential elements of kabbalistic thought, especially its roots in Gnosticism
and ties to Neoplatonism.
          LEIBNIZ AND VAN HELMONT:
           A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE

1667     Leibniz reads van Helmont'sAlphabeti vere naturalis Hebraici
         brevissima Delineatio and his translation of Octavius Pisani's
         Lycurgus Italicus (p. 5).

1671     Leibniz meets van Helmont, who introduces him to von Rosenroth (p. 6).

1672     15125 February - Leibniz writes to Johann Friedrich Schutz
         von Holzhausen, asking about van Helmont's whereabouts
         (p.6).
         21 December- Leibniz writes to Johann Christian Boineburg,
         mentioning that van Helmont is in England (p. 165, n. 140).

1676     February - Von Rosenroth sends Leibniz two works of Robert
         Boyle (p. 6).

1679     December - Leibniz and van Helmont meet while visiting the
         Palatine Princess Elizabeth, Abbess of Herford, at Herford
         (pp. 6,36).

1680     November - In a letter Leibniz says he does not think van
         Helmont possesses the secret of transmutation (p. 7).

1681     Leibniz writes to Landgraf Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels, mentioning van Helmont's conversion to Quakerism (p. 7).

1687-8   31 December to 1 February - Leibniz stays with von Rosenroth
         in Sulzbach (p. 41). Leibniz's notes of their meeting (pp. 4647).

                              xiii
xiv    A Chronological Table

1688          10/20 January - Leibniz writes to Landgraf Ernst von HessenRheinfels, praising von Rosenroth's erudition and describing
              his work on the Kabbalah (p. 47).
              24? April - Leibniz praises von Rosenroth in a letter to Gerhardt Molanus (p. 47).
              September - Leibniz describes von Rosenroth and his work in
              a letter to Hiob Ludolph. He would like to establish a correspondence between Ludolph and von Rosenroth (p. 48).

1692          25 January - Leibniz writes to Loubere describing von Rosenroth as "perhaps the cleverest man in Europe concerning
              knowledge of the most esoteric matters of the Jews." He mentions a magical square which von Rosenroth showed him.
              2 June - Leibniz refers to the square in another letter to Loubere
              (p.42).

1693          Leibniz writes De L'Horizon de la Doctrine Humaine, denying
              the possibility of progress past a certain point (p. 112).

1693?-4       Leibniz writes two critiques of van Helmont's Seder Olam
              (p.68ff.).

1694          Van Helmont visits Hanover. In September Leibniz writes a
              long memorandum for Sophie, the Electress of Hanover, about
              van Helmont's philosophy (p. 58ff.).

1694-96?      Stimulated by van Helmont's ideas, Leibniz writes three memoranda on whether or not progress is infinite (p. 126ff.).

1696          During March and April van Helmont visits Hanover and meets
              with Leibniz and the Electress every morning at nine o'clock
              to discuss his philosophy (pp. 38, 80). He then leaves to visit Sophie's daughter, the Electress of Brandenburg-Prussia,
              Sophie Charlotte, in Berlin (pp. 49-50).
              7/17 March - Leibniz writes to Thomas Burnett, describing
              his morning meetings with van Helmont (p. 38).
              20 March - Leibniz describes these same meetings in a letter
              to Adam Kochanski (p. 38).
              March - Leibniz writes to van Helmont after his departure from
              Hanover, sending him a letter from the younger von Rosenroth
              with the request that on his return to Hanover van Helmont stop
              in Wolfenbiittel to meet Duke Anton Ulric (pp. 49-50).
              March - Leibniz writes a summary of what van Helmont
                                 A Chronological Table      xv

had said to him and Sophie during their morning meetings
(p.80ff.).
7 April- Van Helmont writes to Sophie (p. 50).
9 June - Leibniz praises von Rosenroth's translation of
Boethius' poetry and describes his role in republishing van
Helmont's and von Rosenroth's translation of Boethius (p. 64).
11 July - Hermann von der Hardt writes to Leibniz, paising
van Helmont (p. 70).
July - Van Helmont returns to Hanover. Leibnit's discusses
Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding with van
Helmont and writes his first criticisms of Locke, which he
sends to Thomas Burnett (p. 150).
August-September - Van Helmont visits Hanover and has
many conversations with Leibniz and the Duchess of Hanover
(p.57ff.).
August-September - Leibniz keeps a journal in which he
describes his meetings with van Helmont and their discussions about van Helmont's philosophy and mechanical inventions (p. 58ff.).
September - Leibniz writes a memorandum about van Helmont's opinions for Sophie, which she sent on to her niece,
Elizabeth Charlotte, the Duchess of Orleans (p. 65).
September - Leibniz writes a preface for van Helmont's and
von Rosenroth's translation of Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy. At van Helmont's request Leibniz arranges to have
the work republished (p. 64).
October - Van Helmont writes to Sophie, describing his meeting with Sophie's daughter, the ~lectress of BrandenburgPrussia, and his arrival at his cousin's near Ter Borg (p. 50).
October - Van Helmont writes to Leibniz asking his help in
publishing various of his and von Rosenroth's writings (p. 68).
18 October - Leibniz replies, mentioning some objections that
Sophie and her niece, the Duchess of Orleans, have about van
Helmont's theory of transmigration (p. 69).
1 December - Sophie receives a letter from Abbe de Lessing
asking her to persuade van Helmont to send one of his miraculous medicines to a certain Princess to Chimay (p. 51).
4/14 December - On Sophie's instructions, Leibniz writes to
van Helmont about the Princess de Chimay's request (p. 52).
December - Van Helmont writes to Sophie about the medicine
(p.52).
xvi    A Chronological Table
              10 December - Leibniz writes Morell, expressing his admiration for van Helmont's humanitarianism (p. 9).

1697          Leibniz writes van Helmont's last book, Quaedam praemeditatae & consideratae Cogitationes super Quatuor Priora
              Capita Libri Moysis Genesis nominati (Thoughts on Genesis)(pp. 12,31,84).
              1111 March - Van Helmont writes to Leibniz describing a
              process of distillation and a method for making large mirrors
              (p.66).
              Leibniz sends Erik Benzelius to visit van Helmont (p. 70).
              9 May - Leibniz writes to Sophie Charlotte, Electress of
              Brandenburg-Prussia, about van Helmont's translation of
              Boethius and divine justice (p. 130).

1698          18/28 October - Leibniz writes van Helmont, encouraging him
              to write down his ideas. He looks forward to van Helmont's
              return to Hanover in the spring (p. 71).
              29 September - Leibniz writes to Andre Morell, mentioning
              van Helmont's Thoughts on Genesis (p. 84).
              27 December - Leibniz writes to van Helmont's cousin, Mme.
              de Merode, expressing his sorrow at the news of van Helmont's
              death. He encloses the epitaph he wrote for van Helmont at her
              request and asks her to preserve van Helmont's papers (p. 71).

1699          27 April - Leibniz writes to the Electress of BrandenburgPrussia about van Helmont (p. 74).
              28 June - Mme. de Merode writes to Leibniz about van Helmont's papers (p. 73).
              25 August - Leibniz replies to Mme. de Merode, saying that
              he would like to have van Helmont's memoirs published as
              well as a catalogue of his books and inventions (p. 74).

1701          Leibniz denies that events are bound to repeat themselves and
              argues instead that progress is inevitable (p. 113).
              Leibniz writes a favorable review of Johann Wilhelm
              Petersen's book advocating universal salvation, in which he
              mentions Lady Conway and van Helmont (p. 116).

1706          Leibniz defends the Kabbalah and von Rosenroth in in his
              reflections on J. G. Wachter's Elucidarius Cabalisticus Recondita Hebraeorum Philosophia (p. 75).
              Leibniz sketches a plan for Petersen's long poem advocating
                                         A Chronological Table xvii

       universal salvation, Uranias seu opera Dei magna carmine
       heroico celebrata (p. 115).

1711   Leibniz defends van Helmont in a review of Shaftsbury's Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times (p. 40).
       Leibniz helps Petersen in the actual writing of Uranias (p. 116).

1715   Leibniz writes two fragmentary treatises advocating universal
       salvation, the first entitled Universal Restitution, the second
       entitled simply Restitution (p. 114).
                                Introduction

The general view of scholars is that the Kabbalah had no meaningful influence
on Leibniz's thought.} But on the basis of new evidence I am convinced that
the question must be reopened. The Kabbalah did influence Leibniz, and a
recognition of this will lead to both a better understanding of the supposed
"quirkiness,,2 of Leibniz's philosophy and an appreciation ofthe Kabbalah as
an integral but hitherto ignored factor in the emergence of the modem secular
and scientifically oriented world. During the past twenty years there has been
increasing willingness to recognize the important ways in which mystical and
occult thinking contributed to the development of science and the emergence
of toleration. 3 However, the Kabbalah, particularly the Lurianic Kabbalah
with its monistic vitalism and optimistic philosophy of perfectionism and
universal salvation, has not yet been integrated into the new historiography,
although it richly deserves to be.
   On the basis of manuscripts in libraries at Hanover and Wolfenbiittel, it is
clear that Leibniz's relationship with Francis Mercury van Helmont (16141698) and Christian Knorr von Rosenroth (1636-1689), the two leading
Christian Kabbalists of the period, was much closer than previously imagined
and that his direct knowledge of their writings, especially the collection of
kabbalistic texts they published in the Kabbala Denudata, 4 was far more
detailed than most scholars have realized. During 1688 Leibniz spent more
than a month at Sulzbach with von Rosenroth. Foucher de Careil has pointed
out how strange it was for Leibniz to stay in this one place for such a long time
when he stayed hardly anywhere else for more than two nights. 5 He suggests
this must reflect a more than casual interest on Leibniz's part, although he
rejects any kabbalistic influence on Leibniz's thought. As he says, "One
senses that it [the Kabbalah] was only an object of curiosity for him, like
many other imaginary curiosities of his time or of past centuries .... This
energetic thinker [Leibniz] reduced all these doctrines to his own system. He
only took what agreed with his own thought.,,6

2      Introduction

    Like so many commentators, Foucher de Careil is at pains to protect
Leibniz's reputation as a rationalist wholly uncontaminated by the bizarre
doctrines of the innumerable mystics, vitalists, and spiritualists populating
the intellectual landscape of the early modem period. This view of Leibniz
 was, and in some quarters still is, prevalent. Many of the best known critics
of Leibniz's thought have followed Bertrand Russell's lead and claim that
"Leibniz's philosophy was almost entirely derived from his logic.,,7 In the
words of Couturat, "Leibniz's metaphysics rests solely on the principles
of his 10gic."S Leibniz is consequently the prime example of a rationalist
philosopher: "Thus, the philosophy of Leibniz appears as the most complete
and systematic expression possible of intellectual rationalism.,,9 But in recent
years this view has been challenged. Leibniz, the rationalist philosopher, has
ceded place to a far more complex and interesting individual, whose attempt
to synthesize Renaissance vitalism and seventeenth-century atomism led him
to an open-ended dialogue with both the living and the dead, a dialogue in
which he constantly tested, refined, and modified his views. This is one reason
why Leibniz's correspondence and unpublished manuscripts are so important
as sources for reconstructing his thought. As Leibniz himself said, "Anyone
who knows me only by my publications does not know me at all."l0 Like his
monadology, Leibniz's philosophy was both dynamic and in many respects
far too radical to be appreciated until the present century. 11
   The assumption that one can usefully, or even accurately, distinguish
between empiricism and rationalism or between the so-called mechanical philosophy and occultism during the seventeenth century has become a subject
of considerable debate. Richard Popkin has been one of the most persuasive
of those who argue that philosophy, science, and theology were inseparable in
this period and that even the most apparently rational of seventeenth-century
intellectuals, such as Newton, Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz, turned variously to the Scriptures, prophecy, mystical or occult texts, and the inner light
in formulating and supporting their theories. 12 Meyer makes this point eloquently and consistently in his careful documentation of the great diversity
of sources Leibniz drew upon in the formulation of his mature philosophy.13
Baruzi emphasizes the "irrational" elements in Leibniz's "rationalism" and
suggests that the essence of Leibniz's theodicy lay in his mystical faith in a
kind of religious determinism. 14 Mahnke describes Leibniz as "rationalizing
mysticism." 15 Friedmann emphasizes the occult aspects of Leibniz's thought,
regretting the fact that these sources have not been studied as closely as they
deserve. 16 He goes as far as to describe Leibniz as a late seventeenth-century
Paracelsus, who had the good fortune to profit from a century of modem
science. 17 Knecht presents a detailed account of the diverse occult sources
from which Leibniz drew his ideas. IS For scholars subscribing to the so-called
                                                            Introduction      3
"external" view of science and philosophy, Leibniz's logic and metaphysics
are indeed connected, but his metaphysics, which includes, or is included, in
his theology, came first. Loemker came to this conclusion many years ago: " ...
it is significant that not only Leibniz's metaphysics but his logic and physics
were developed as a foundation for his theology." 19 On a number of occasions
Leibniz revealed where his priorites lay. For example, he described himself
in the eyes of an imaginary visitor as follows:
  I surprised him [Leibniz] one day, reading books about [religious] controversies. I showed my astonishment because I had been led to believe he
  was a mathematician by profession, since he had done practically nothing
  else while in Paris. It was then that he told me that such an idea was very
  mistaken, that he had many other interests, and that his principal meditations involved theology. He only applied himself to mathematics, as he did
  to scholastic philosophy, to perfect his understanding and to learn the art
  of discovering and demonstrating [truth], which he believed to be so far
  apart at present as to be entirely different. 20
   Loemker rejects Russell's view that there were two Leibnizes, a good
logician and a bad, even dishonest, theologian. In his view, Leibniz's logic,
like his science, was one aspect of his larger attempt to formulate a general
science, but his conviction that a general science was possible rested on metaphysical and theological assumptions derived from such thinkers as Raymond
Lull and the circle of encyclopedists at Herborn, hardly remembered for their
rationalism. 21 For Loemker, it is Leibniz's refusal to ignore the complexities
and inconsistencies of real life for the sake of forging a fully rational system
that makes him such an enduring and sympathetic philosopher:
  His age and his own genius confirmed the logician and mathematician in
  him, while his devotion to fact pushed him to acknowledge the unclear,
  the indistinct, and the relative, to a point far beyond the superficial clarities and rationalizations of the age which followed him. One must choose
  between the Leibniz who recognizes the symbolic and analogical nature
  of human thought but seeks the universal logical and moral norms which
  make it possible and the Leibniz who would analyze possibility and find
  existence hidden within it. The choice is between his two great analogies mathematical relationships or psychological continuity within a phenomenally presented environment. It is the choice of beginning either from
  the pure logic of anll;lysis and failing to build a metaphysics or from the
  awareness of the human situation but with a willingness to proceed beyond
  phenomena to the principles on which they may be "well founded." To one
  student at least, it is the latter Leibniz, who begins with human problems
  and human symbols but retains the powerful tools of reason not only in
4       Introduction

    mathematics and logic but in life, without sacrificing the adventure of
    human creativeness, who seems to offer the more fruitful philosophical
    answers.22

Taking Loemker's lead, one must conclude that it is impossible to understand those "quirkier" aspects of Leibniz's thought without admitting that
metaphysics and theology played a major part in his thinking and acknowledging that in his effort to comprehend the meaning and purpose of life he
drew on a variety of sources from all parts of the philosophical spectrum.
For example, Margaret Wilson has demonstrated that the so-called vis viva
controversy is not fully comprehensible unless one realizes that Leibniz's
objection to the Cartesian axiom of the conservation of motion (and not force
as Leibniz argued) was motivated by Leibniz's theological and metaphysical
commitment to contingency and teleology in nature. 23 David Papineau makes
much the same point when he points out how mistaken scholars have been
who dismiss the controversy as an empty dispute over terminology.24 Leibniz
himself tells us as much, making it crystal clear that metaphysics determined
his science, not science his metaphysics:
    Although I am one of those who have done much work in mathematics,
    I have constantly meditated on philosophy from my youth up, for it has
    always seemed to me that here, too, there is a way to establish something
    sound through clear demonstrations. I had penetrated deeply into the land of
    the Scholastics, when mathematics and modem authors made me withdraw
    from it while I was still young. Their beautiful ways of explaining nature
    mechanically charmed me, and with good reason I despised the method of
    those who use only forms or faculties of which nothing is understood. But
    later, after trying to explore the principles of mechanics itself in order to
    account for the laws of nature which we learn from experience, I perceived
    that the sole consideration of extended mass was not enough but that it
    was necessary, in addition, to use the concept of jorce, which is fully
    intelligible, although it falls within the sphere of metaphysics. 25
In a similar way, the debate about exactly what Leibniz envisaged by monads
has led at least one scholar to throw up her hands and conclude the problem
insoluble from a strictly rational perspective, since a monad "is a mystical
concept, not only a construct of reason.,,26
   R. E. Butts has further weakened the case for the rationalist Leibniz, whose
admittedly bizarre metaphysics stemmed from his science, by perceptively
pointing out that if Leibniz's mathematical and logical discoveries provided
the basis for his metaphysics, how can one account for the very different
conclusions other scientists derived from the same mathematical and logical
theories? Referring specifically to Leibniz's discovery of infinitesimal calcuIntroduction       5

Ius, which has often been seen as the foundation for his monadology, Butts
remarks, "If the calculus were liable to metaphysical interpretation only in
terms of Leibnizian continuity, what fools Newton and Berkeley must have
been!,,27 Butts completely rejects the view of Leibniz as a rationalist and
argues instead that his philosophy is essentially a reformation of Gnosticism: " ... the entire intellectual career of Leibniz was an attempt to convert
what he took to be the insights and consequences of an essentially gnostic
weltanschauung into publicly available scientific knowledge.,,28 Butts argues
that Leibniz's idea of continuity, his idea that monads emanate from God in
the form of light, and his notion that evil represents limit and privation all
originate in Gnosticism:
   If I am right that the physics of forces was suggested by the organicism
   of Leibniz's publicly proclaimed systematic Gnosticism; if I am right
   that the infinitesimals are a mathematicized expression of the principle of
   continuity coupled with the basic idea of the monad, then I think I may
   also be right in suggesting that the fundamental Leibnizian notion that in
   all true propositions the predicate is fully contained in, or is identical with,
   the subject is again the statement of a result of having accepted the Godmonad-emanation-continuity metaphysics that I have sketched above. Like
   Plato, Leibniz was not a "systematic" philosopher.... I do think it correct to
   hold, however, that Leibniz had a system, and that system was a coherent
   form of Renaissance Gnosticism. To want to make the ancient wisdom
   public, to want to have it motivate empirical inquiries - even to produce
   palpable practical results - was a high ambition. 29
Butts is entirely right in pointing out the gnostic roots of Leibniz's philosophy. But instead of the somewhat vague, generic sources he cites, the
primary gnostic source for many of Leibniz's most important ideas was the
Lurianic Kabbalah, which Leibniz came to know though his friendship and
collaboration with Francis Mercury van Helmont.
   My contention that Leibniz was influenced by the kabbalistic philosophy
of Francis Mercury van Helmont rests on the fact that Leibniz's relationship
with van Helmont extended over a much longer period, from 1671 to van
Helmont's death in 1698, and was far closer than has previously been known.
While it is true that Leibniz had a lively curiosity and a courtier's courtesy,
these alone cannot explain his unusual interest in van Helmont's views. The
manuscripts in the "Helmont" collection in the Nierdersachsische Landesbibliothek in Hanover, together with manuscripts from other collections, show
how conversant Leibniz was with van Helmont's thought. Even before they
met in 1671, Leibniz knew van Helmont by reputation - he was, after all,
the son of Jan Baptista van Helmont, whose work Leibniz knew well. In
1667 Leibniz mentions reading the younger van Helmont's first two books,
6       Introduction

his translation of Octavius Pisani's Lycurgus Italicus, a book advocating a
reform of the penal system, and his Alphabeti vere naturalis Hebraici brevissima Delineatio, in which he argued that Hebrew was both a divine and
"natural" language. 3D Leibniz described their first meeting in Mainz in 1671
and suggests it was far from perfunctory in as much as they talked freely
about a touchy subject, alchemy, which greatly interested them both. 31 Leibniz was also in Sulzbach in 1671, where, through the offices of van Helmont,
he was introduced to Christian Knorr von Rosenroth. With van Helmont's
help, von Rosenroth was in the process of editing and translating the kabbalistic texts that would later be published in the Kabbala Denudata. 32 Further
references to van Helmont and von Rosenroth occur in 1672 when Leibniz
writes to Johann Friedrich Schlitz in the hopes of discovering van Helmont's
whereabouts,33 in 1676 when Leibniz mentions that von Rosenroth has sent
him a copy of Boyle's "Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God" and
"The Possibility ofthe Resurrection, .. 34 and in 1679 when Leibniz again met
van Helmont at the sick bed of the Palatine Princess Elizabeth, who was an
old friend of van Helmont's and the sister of Leibniz's future patron, Sophie
Duchess of Hanover. 35 In 1681 Leibniz mentions van Helmont in several
letters. Six years after that came Leibniz's long stay in Sulzbach. In 1694
Leibniz again met van Helmont for extensive periods in March and April,
this time at Hanover. From this year until van Helmont's death in 1698, Leibniz and van Helmont were in constant contact, either personally or by letter.
It is my belief that the initial contacts between van Helmont, von Rosenroth,
and Leibniz between 1671 and 1688 laid the foundation for the more intense
friendship and collaboration that began in 1694 and played a catalytic role in
the formulation of Leibniz's fully developed monadology.
    There are many reasons why Leibniz should have been drawn to van
Helmont. The description of Leibniz as a super rationalist overlooks the fact
that like van Helmont he was enthralled by every aspect of the material world,
not in an abstract intellectual sense but as a thorough-going empiricist: " ...
nothing allows us to indicate the divine perfections better than the admirable
beauties that are found in its works." His receptivity to the wonders of nature
made him critical of spiritualists and quietists who rejected the study of this
world as worthless and even corrupting:

     I see that the majority of those who pretend to a greater spirituality,
    especially the Quakers, try to create a distaste for the contemplation of
    natural truths. But in my opinion, they ought to do exactly the opposite
    if they do not wish to maintain our natural laziness and ignorance. < In
    this I find Messieurs Helmont, Knorr, More and Poiret more reasonable
    than the majority of the others, although I do not wish to sanction many
    oftheir sentiments where they stray from the Church.> True love is based
                                                           Introduction      7

   on knowledge of the beauty of the object one loves. But the beauty of God
   appears in the marvelous effects of his sovereign cause. Thus, the more
   one und~rstands nature and the solid truth of real sciences, which are so
   many rays of divine perfection, the more one is able to truly love God. 36

Leibniz's exclusion of Van Helmont (along with von Rosenroth, More, and
Poiret) from such world-denying spiritualists was certainly accurate in van
Helmont's case, for as van Helmont once wrote, "the beauty of this Living Earth when seen with a microscope will make a man in Love with
it. ,,37 Both Leibniz and van Helmont were practicing alchemists who avidly
studied minerals, metals, and a variety of different substances and chemical
processes. 38 Leibniz's interest in alchemy revealed itself early in his career
when he became the secretary of a society in Niirnberg whose members were
interested in transmutation. 39 Although van Helmont's fame as an alchemist
was greater, Leibniz also had the reputation of an adept with deep theoretical knowledge. Like his English contemporaries, Boyle, Locke, and Newton,
Leibniz hoped to make a fortune from the art. With this aim in mind, he entered
into a profit-sharing agreement in 1676 with two alchemists, G. H. Schuller
and J. D. Crafft, in which he provided the capital and the advice. As Ross
has remarked, Leibniz was apparently always an easy touch for alchemists. 4o
Undoubtedly it was because of his own interest that Leibniz carefully followed van Helmont's alchemical career. In 1680 he told a correspondent that
he did not believe van Helmont knew the secret of transmutation, precisely
because of the long talks they had some eight years earlier. 41 In 1681 he
informed Landgraf Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels that van Helmont was in the
company of a M. Kohlhas, who passed himself off as an adept. 42 In the letters
they wrote and discussions they had between 1694 and 1698 Leibniz and van
Helmont often brought up various alchemical subjects concerning the making
of medicines and the process of distillation. Leibniz even discussed alchemy
on his death bed. Much to the disgust of a Catholic critic, who believed it
would have been more profitable for Leibniz to have spent his last moments
worrying about the unfortunate state of his soul, Leibniz's final words concerned a report that iron nails had been transmuted into gold through the
action of a certain spring. 43
     The fact that van Helmont and Leibniz were both practising alchemists
reveals their common grounding in what has been labelled "Renaissance
occultism," a subject of enormous importance in the history of science, as
Paolo Rossi, Francis Yates, D. P. Walker, and Charles Webster, among others,
have shown. From Nicolas of Cusa to Giordano Bruno, major Renaissance
philosophers shared an animistic view of the world as one harmonious whole,
filled with innumerable immaterial, vital souls created by God through a series
of emanations. Brian Vickers has made the cogent observation that the whole
8      Introduction

tenor of Renaissance Neoplatonism and occultism in general is "a progressive
reification of the immaterial. ..44 The elaborate series of emanations described
in the various neoplatonic, hermetic, and kabbalistic creation myths woven
together in the rich fabric of Renaissance occultism served to explain how the
one became the many or how spirit was gradually transformed into matter.
Leibniz and van Helmont rejected Cartesian dualism precisely because of
their allegiance to Renaissance occultism. Their friendship and collaboration
was based to a large extent on their mutual indebtedness to a vitalistic world
view that originated in an earlier age and came increasingly under attack with
the emergence of the so-called mechanical philosophy.
    Renaissance occultists, and those who followed in their footsteps like
van Helmont and Leibniz, were also committed to the idea that a certain
prisca theologia, or primeval philosophy, existed which God had imparted
to Moses on Mt. Sinai and which had culminated in Christianity. Elements
of this ancient wisdom were thought to be contained in the philosophy of
Pythagoras and Plato, the Hermetica, the Sibylline Prophecies, the Ophica,
and, of course, the Kabbalah. 45 It was believed that if this prisca theologia
could be rediscovered in its authentic, uncorrupted form, it would provide
the basis for a truly ecumenical religion and bring an end, once and for all,
to the terrible wars caused by religious conflicts. While nominally Christian,
the various versions of this supposedly rediscovered prisca theologia offered
by Pico della Mirandola, Guillaume Postel, Giordano Bruno, and Tommaso
Campanella, for example, were heretical in many respects. 46 As I will argue,
the version van Helmont thought he had rediscovered in the Lurianic Kabbalah
and which influenced Leibniz's Monadology (Leibniz's own version of the
prisca theologia47 ) was equally heretical because it reasserted the Pelagian
belief in universal salvation condemned by the Roman Catholic Church in
416 C. E. The subject of both Renaissance occultism and the search for the
prisca theologia will come up repeatedly in this monograph (for example,
when discussing the sources of Leibniz's Monadology in chapter four, his
theodicy in chapter six, and his theories of causation in chapter seven), for it
is my contention that Renaissance occultism - in all its various forms - and
the search for the prisca theologia provided the basis for Leibniz's mature
monadology and the rationale for his optimism. Thus, while the whole point
of this monograph is to show that van Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy
had a decisive influence in shaping Leibniz's Monadology, it is important
to recognize the common heritage of ideas which influenced the thought
of both men. Leibniz was not introduced to the Kabbalah by van Helmont;
kabbalistic ideas were a part of Leibniz's intellectual heritage, and he referred
to the Kabbalah, both positively and negatively, before the period of his close
friendship and collaboration with van Helmont. 48 Van Helmont did, however,
                                                             Introduction      9
introduce Leibniz to the Lurianic Kabbalah, and it is the purpose of this
monograph to explore the ways in which this particular form of the Kabbalah
influenced Leibniz's philosophy.
   Although Leibniz and van Helmont were both practicing alchemists and
clearly interested in the lucrative aspects of the art, they were more than
"projectors" in the alchemical sense. Private gain did not interest them nearly
as much as the public good. As Leibniz wrote in a letter to Thomas Burnett:
"You know my principles, Sir, which are to prefer the public good to all
other considerations, even to glory and gold.,,49 This is perhaps what drew
them most together. They were both committed to doing everything possible
to improve the human condition, first and foremost by restoring religious
unity and, secondly, by devising innumerable projects for all kinds of socially
useful inventions. Leibniz's calculator is perhaps the best known, but he
also proposed plans for such things as a high speed coach, which would run
along rutted tracks on something like ball bearings, a scheme for draining
water from the Hartz mines, an inland navigation system, the manufacture
of porcelain, the exploitation of waste heat in furnaces, tax reform, a public
health and fire service, steam-powered fountains, street lighting, a state bank,
and isolation wards for plague victims. so While not quite so ingenious, van
Helmont devised plans for a two-handed spinning wheel and weaving projects
to employ the poor, a chair to straighten crooked backs, and new methods
to teach the deaf and dumb to speak and children to write. Leibniz's similar
concern with education appeared early in his career with A New Method for
Learning and Teaching Jurisprudence (1667). Van Helmont also described
a scheme for setting up pawn shops to help the poor, which he presented to
the Royal Society,S1 and he offered proposals for reforming both the medical
and the legal professions. Leibniz constantly refers to this altruistic aspect of
van Helmont's character. In a letter to Thomas Burnett he emphasizes the fact
that van Helmont was one of the few people he knew who practiced virtue
instead of just talking about it. He admits that van Helmont may well have
extraordinary opinions, but he adds, "for all that I find that he has excellent
ideas about practical matters and that he would be overjoyed to contribute to
the general good, in which I entirely agree ... "S2 Leibniz repeated much the
same thing in a letter to Andre Morell, the numismatist and zealous disciple
of Boehme and Poiret:

  In my opinion the touchstone of true illumination is a great eagerness for
  contributing to the general good. I find so few people who take this to heart
  that I am astonished. I have suggested this thousands oftimes. But I usually
  find that those people who wish to appear the most pious are paralyzed
  when it really comes to doing something good. They are content to vent
  themselves with fine words as if God can be earned with ceremonies. I find
10       Introduction

     also that few men have a true idea of good. I only deign to give this name
     to someone who really tries to make men more perfect and the grandeur of
     God better known. I also find that those who are of a sectarian or schismatic
     humor, that is to say those who have separated themselves as men filled
     with good intentions, but who do not act reasonably in their opinions, do
     not know how to have charity nor illumination in its true purity. It seems to
     me that the late M. Labadie, the late Mlle. de Bourignon, and William Penn,
     with his co-religionists, had that fault of being sectarian and condemning.
     Among those who had extraordinary ideas, I have hardly found anyone
     beside M. van Helmont who shared this great principle of charity with
     me and who had a true eagerness for the general good, although in other
     respects we often had very different opinions about different matters. 53

For Leibniz true piety consisted in charity towards one's fellow men - not
separation from them - whatever their station in life, country of birth, or
particular religion: " ... to contribute to the public good and to the glory of
God is the same thing. ,,54 Their humanitarian outlook and mutual concern
for justice predisposed both men to take a tolerant view whenever possible
of the opinions and actions of others. This outlook led van Helmont to the
unusual conviction that a just God could not damn men eternally, whatever
their beliefs or sins. He consequently rejected the orthodox conception of
hell in favor of universal salvation. While Leibniz did not go as far, at least
publicly, he was influenced by van Helmont's arguments, as I will argue in a
later portion of this monograph.
   The major impetus behind the activities of both men was their untiring
effort to restore religious unity in an age of deadly and vituperative sectarian
conflict. Baruzi, who has studied Leibniz's theological writings, concluded
that had Leibniz dated to write out a full exposition of his views, it would
probably have centered on three elements: the love of God as a sufficient condition for salvation; charity towards one's fellow man as the most important
religious duty, and the cultivation of philosophy and science as a way to gain
knowledge of God. 55 While in Paris Leibniz formulated a prayer which he
thought the basis for a truly ecumenical religion, only to receive a shocked
response from Arnauld, who rejected it outright because it said nothing about
Christ. 56 Van Helmont's ecumenism went even farther than Leibniz's, to the
point that he was pursued and imprisoned as a heretic. He believed that all
men could be saved, whatever their religion, a sentiment that clearly undercut
the unique role of Christ in salvation and embraced the Pelagian idea that
an individual could be saved by his own efforts. 57 As I will show, the same
Pelagian implications appear in Leibniz's mature monadology and came from
van Helmont and the Lurianic Kabbalah.
                                                              Introduction     11

   Leibniz loathed the dogmatic approach and intemperate language characteristic of the philosophical and scientific debates of the time. He consistently
tried to put a good spin on the opinions of others, including van Helmont's,
as we shall see. In his own writings he found it impossible to be dogmatic or
even systematic. As Ross has pointed out, the dialogue form seems to have
suited him best. 58 This may account for the fact that his correspondence is
so much richer a source for his philosophy than the relatively few works he
managed to publish, for it is a continual dialogue in which he never ceases to
probe and question. Given his basic quest for consensus, the tentative nature
of his system is understandable and even laudable:

   My system ... is not a complete body of philosophy, and I do not claim
   to have a reason for everything that other people have thought they can
   explain. Progress must be gradual to be assured. 59

Van Helmont also preferred the dialogue form. Most of his books are written as
questions and answers, even the one Leibniz ghosted for him, but this is to look
ahead. Both Leibniz and van Helmont were able to keep up amicable relations
with people of widely differing opinions and views. 6o This ability provided
the basis for Russell's unfortunate charge that Leibniz was insincere and
duplicitous, when it could be argued instead that he was intellectually broadminded as well as civil. In van Helmont's case, his ability to inspire friendships
among a widely divergent group of scientists, philosophers, statesmen, and
theologians (which, in addition to Leibniz, included Locke, More, Boyle,
all the members of the Palatine family, Lord and Lady Conway, and Prince
Christian August of Sulzbach, to name but a few) has been overlooked in
the general rush to dismiss him as an enthusiast and intellectual light-weight.
(Hopefully, this investigation will slow down the rush, if not stop it all
together).
   There is one last reason that helps to explain the friendship of these two
men. Both were outsiders in the sense that the universality of their vision
transcended the narrow sectarian and national boundaries so fiercely defended
at the time. In a century of increasing nationalism and patriotism, Leibniz
clung to the universalistic ideal of the Republic of Letters. Writing to Des
Billettes, a pensioner of the Academy of Sciences in Paris and an expert on
arts and crafts, he emphasizes his concern for the betterment of all men:
  Provided that something of importance is achieved, I am indifferent whether
  it is done in Germany or in France, for I seek the good of mankind. I am
  neither a phil-Hellene nor a philo-Roman but a phil-anthropos.61
In another letter written at the end of his life, he expressed much the same
idea:
12       Introduction

      ... I make no distinction of nation or party, and I should prefer to see
     the sciences made flourishing in Russia rather than given only mediocre
     cultivation in Germany. The country which does this best will be the
     country dearest to me, since the whole human race will always profit from
     it. 62

There were, however, those who considered his international and ecumenical
efforts treachery, and by these he was given the nickname "Love - nix,"
believer in nothing. 63 (Leibniz took the Socratic high road in his response.
Yes, he agreed he was a believer in nothing since he believed only what he
knew. 64 ) Van Helmont also aroused the suspicion of those who saw something sinister and subversive behind his genial and generous nature. He was,
for example, labeled and even imprisoned by the Inquisition as a "judaizer,"
meaning that he not only failed to hate the Jews the way a normal Christian should, but that he went out of his way to defend and support Jews,
even befriending the unfortunate Johann Peter Speath after his conversion to
Judaism, an all but unheard of act for Christians, who looked upon conversion
to Judaism with horror. 65 Leibniz and van Helmont were also both outsiders
in that they ignored conventions, be it of dress or manners. Leibniz's German
contemporaries scoffed at him for being "Frenchified." Late in life he became
an object of ridicule for his old-fashioned, overly ornate clothes and huge
black wig. The Electress Sophie's youngest son, Prince Ernst August, once
described Leibniz as an "archaeological find" and joked that Peter the Great
must have taken him for the Duke of Wolfenbiittel's clown. 66 Van Helmont
cut an equally strange figure. He adopted the Quaker practice of refusing to
remove one's hat and bow to superiors, scandalous behavior in an intensely
hierarchical age, but an indication of van Helmont's deep commitment to
the democratic principle of universal brotherhood. He too refused to bend to
fashion and wore simple clothes from material spun, woven, and tailored with
his own hands. Shortly after van Helmont's death, Leibniz wrote his epitaph.
It reveals the extent of his admiration for this friend who was his double in
so many respects:
  Here lies the other Helmont, in no way inferior to his father,
    who joined together the wealth of various arts and sciences.
    Through him Pythagoras and the sacred Cabala were reborn.
    And like Elaus, he was able to make everything for himself.
    If he had lived among the Greeks,
    he would now be numbered among the stars. 67
  With this introduction one may be in a better position to understand why
Leibniz should actually have ghosted van Helmont's last book. As Anne Becco has shown from her examination of Leibniz's manuscripts, Leibniz actuIntroduction     13
ally wrote the last work published in van Helmont's name, Some Premeditate
and Considerate Thoughts upon the Four First Chapters of the First Book
of Mosis called Genesis (hereafter abbreviated as Thoughts on Genesis).68
Ghost-writing a book for a self-proclaimed Kabbalist is an extraordinary act
for someone supposedly repelled by fanciful kabbalistic theories 69 and one
that cries out for explanation. The explanation lies in those aspects of kabbalistic thought which Leibniz adapted to his own purposes. In what follows
I suggest the key issues in Leibniz's philosophy that must be analyzed from
a kabbalistic perspective, for example, his concept of monads, his attempt to
defend free will, and his theories of language and causation, and I document
the ways in which van Helmont's thought acted as a catalyst in the development of Leibniz's. In taking this position I am following in the footsteps of
Anne Becco and Bernardino Qrio de Miguel, who have both argued that van
Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy influenced Leibniz, although my evidence
is different and, I hope, more persuasive. 7o But before considering those who
entertain the idea of van Helmont's possible influence on Leibniz, it is first
necessary to discuss the work of those who reject such an influence. Since
the literature on Leibniz is enormous, I mention only some of the best known
and most often cited works dealing with the sources of Leibniz's thought,
hoping to give the reader an accurate overall impression of the present state
of Leibniz scholarship on these issues.
   To establish van Helmont's influence on Leibniz, it is imperative to establish two points: first, that Leibniz's mature philosophy was not in place by
the time he wrote the Discourse on Metaphysics in 1686 but continued to
evolve between 1694 and 1698 when his contact with van Helmont was most
intense; and second, that if Leibniz's philosophy did indeed evolve after 1694,
enough persuasive evidence exists to show that it evolved in ways that can
be attributed to van Helmont's influence. It is not always possible to keep
these questions separate, but in order to bring as much clarity as possible to
my argument, I have divided the remainder of this study into seven chapters
and a conclusion. The first chapter reviews the arguments for and against the
thesis that the Discourse represents the emergence of Leibniz's mature philosophy. Among those who have argued that Leibniz's philosophy evolved, I
have only included in this section those authors who attribute this evolution
to factors other than van Helmont or who leave the question of influence
unanswered. In the second chapter, I discuss the work of those authors who
have either suggested van Helmont's possible influence on Leibniz or who
recognize that their thought "converged" in important respects. I then turn to
Anne Becco's important discovery that Leibniz actually wrote van Helmont's
last published work and to the thesis supported by her and Qrio de Miguel
that van Helmont did influence Leibniz in decisive ways. In the third chapter,
14    Introduction

I offer new evidence to show the closeness of Leibniz and van Helmont's
friendship and the reasons for their collaboration. In the next three chapters
I take up three key issues in Leibniz's philosophy, his concept of monads,
his attempt to establish a basis for individual freedom, and his theodicy, and
I offer evidence to show how the Kabbalah contributed to the development
of Leibniz's mature philosophy in each of these areas. In the final chapter I
discuss the ways in which Leibniz's theories of causation and language were
influenced by the Kabbalah.
                               CHAPTER ONE

           A Brief Historiography of Leibniz Studies

E. J. Aiton, who published his important and immensely informative biography of Leibniz in 1976, followed in the footsteps of Russell, Rescher, and
others and concluded that Leibniz's mature philosophy was virtually in place
by 1686 when the Discourse was published: 71
  That Leibniz himself regarded the Discourse on metaphysics as marking a
  decisive stage in the development of his philosophy is shown by his remark
  to Thomas Burnett in a letter of May 1697, that he was only satisfied with
  the philosophical ideas he had held from about 1685. Although many of the
  ideas had been germinating from his university days and are to be found
  in earlier works - for example, the subject-predicated logic in De arte
  combinatoria, the idea of harmony in the Confession of nature against
  atheists, the principle of sufficient reason in the letter to Wedderkopf,
  substantial forms in the letter to Thomasius and the idea of the best in a note
  written after his meeting with Spinoza - the Discourse on metaphysics is
  the first of Leibniz's writings to bind them together in a coherent system.72
Aiton mentions van Helmont, but never as a possible influence. 73 In fact, he
suggests that Leibniz derived the term monad while still a student from his
university teacher Thomasius. In the preface to his Disputatio metaphysica de
principio individui (1663), Thomasius describes Aristotle as dividing individuals into two sorts, the "monadic," where each individual constitutes a species
(such as the angels) and the "sporadic," where innumerable individuals are
included in one species. 74 As for the concept of the monad, Aiton believed
it emerged either from the alchemical idea that within each substance there
remains a vital center or seed from which the substance can be reconstituted,
or from Leibniz's meeting with Leeuwenhoek in 1676 and his introduction
to the world of micro-organisms. But whatever the direct impetus, Aiton is
convinced that what essentially led Leibniz to his theory of monads was "one
of his favorite themes," the labyrinth ofthe continuum. 75
    Yet Aiton also admits that Leibniz's philosophy continued to develop after
the Discourse, for example, when he introduced the notion of force in his

16       Chapter One

Specimen Dynamicum, which was begun in 1689 but only published in the
Acta eruditorum in April, 1695. Aiton further admits that in this work Leibniz
still held to the Aristotelian notion that bodies consist of matter and form,76 a
far cry from the idealism and phenomenalism other commentators find in the
Monadology. Even more damaging to his view that 1686 marks the emergence
of Leibniz's mature philosophy is his admission that the second part of the
Specimen Dynamicum, which was supposed to have been published in the
May volume of Acta eruditorum but never appeared, contains the important
new idea that space and time are relative:
     Although the second part of the Specimen dynamicum did not appear as
     promised in the May issue, its contents reveal some of the new ideas that
     Leibniz was at that time attempting to put in order. First he emphasized
     that, while force was absolutely real, space and time, like motion, was not
     real as such but only in so far as they involved the divine attributes of
     immensity, eternity and activity or the force of created substances. From
     this he deduced that there could be no vacuum in space and time and that
     motion, considered apart from force, was relative. 77
Citing a letter from Leibniz to L'Hospital, Aiton says that the second part of
the Specimen Dynamicum remained unfinished because Leibniz's philosophy
was continuing to evolve: "he had been unable to finish the work, evidently
envisaged by him as a definitive treatise that could complete Newton's Principia, owing to the new ideas which continually came to him.,,78 Thus, Aiton
himself admits that developments were taking place in Leibniz's philosophy
during those very years after 1694 when Leibniz was in close contact with van
Helmont. As I will attempt to show, crucial ideas like the essential spirituality
of matter as well as the relativity of time and space were basic aspects of
van Helmont's thought and far more influential in shaping Leibniz's eventual
monadology than Thomasius' reference to "monadic" species, alchemy, or
Leeuwenhoek's microscopic observations.
   Many scholars reject the idea that the Discourse marked the emergence
of Leibniz's mature philosophy. Loernker, for example, considers 1690 the
decisive date, but he also thinks that Leibniz's philosophy continued to evolve
even after this to the end of his life:
  ... the mature period of Leibniz's thought begins with the Meditations on
  Knowledge, Truth, and Ideas (1684). It is only after his return from Italy in
  1690, however, that such fundamental concepts as those of individuality,
  force, the intercourse between monads, and the gradations of substances
  are analyzed in detail. The year 1690 may therefore be regarded as the
  line of demarcation between Leibniz's early period of eclecticism and
  discovery and his mature system. Yet his thought cannot be regarded as
                                      Historiography of Leibniz Studies      17

  either complete or stable, even in his last period of about twenty-five
  years. 79
Loernker summarily dismisses Russell's evaluation (accepted by Aiton) of
the Discourse as the best account of Leibniz's philosophy:
  It is not even an adequate one; among other things, he had yet to perfect
  his analysis of vis viva, of the gradation of individual perceptions and
  appetites, and of the nature of corporeal beings. And he also later changed
  his argument for the existence and nature of individual substances. 8o
Daniel Garber also thinks that Leibniz's philosophy changed significantly in
his later years. His argues that until approximately 1704 Leibniz took the
essentially Aristotelian position that corporeal substance really existed, but
that after this date he verged increasingly towards idealism until he ended up
embracing phenomenalism. Garber considers the late 1690s as the key period
in this development.
   Garber began his work on Leibniz's physics with the express intention
"to sharpen, expand, and carefully document" an observation made by C. D.
Broad that Leibniz was basically an Aristotelian in the 1680s and 1690s and
only later adopted the idealism of the monadology.81 Garber concluded that
Broad was entirely right. Although few other scholars recognized this stage
in Leibniz's development, tending to characterize the mature Leibniz as a
consistent phenomenalist, Leibniz had indeed been a realist whose view of
substance was basically Aristotelian. But sometime in the last fifteen years
of his life he changed into an idealist, whose physics and dynamics could no
longer claim to describe the world as it really is but only as it appears to be:
  This phenomenalistic interpretation of derivative force and the status that
  it entails for the science of dynamics is, to be sure, a genuine Leibnizian
  position. But, it must be emphasized, this represents a fundamental change
  from the thought of Leibniz's middle years. In the '80s and '90s it's the
  corporeal substance that's the thing, the center of Leibniz's thought and
  the basic building-block of his world. And it is the corporeal substance
  that provides a real foundation for his science of dynamics. 82
In Garber's opinion both the Discourse and the Specimen Dynamicum represent Leibniz's Aristotelian phase:
  ... in the era of the Discourse and the Specimen Dynamicum, physics is, I
  claim, an account of the laws that govern a real world of quasi-Aristotelian
  substances. 83
By the time the Monadology was written, however, Leibniz had become a
phenomenalist:
18       Chapter One

     The world of the Monadology, it is generally acknowledged, is a world of
     souls (or something analogous) and souls alone; everything in the world
     of the Monadology is, ultimately, grounded in the mental. 84
Garber wants to know when and why Leibniz relinquished realism for idealism, but he leaves these questions unanswered:
      I have granted that the standard view of Leibniz and the foundations
     of his physics, a metaphysically real world of mind-like monads and a
     phenomenal world of physical bodies acting in accordance with the laws
     of physics, is indeed the picture of Leibniz's later years. But, one might
     well ask, when does Leibniz adopt this later view, and why? This and other
     important questions must be left unanswered for the moment at least. 85
I would argue that one reaso~ Garber cannot answer the question is that
Leibniz never truly embraced phenomenalism. As Garber himself says, it is
hard to decide exactly when this change in outlook occurred precisely because
too many passages cited to support Leibniz's Aristotelianism are ambiguous
and might equally well be interpreted as evidence of his idealism:
  Few of the passages I have cited are entirely unambiguous; it is possible
  that almost every one could be given an idealistic reading, just as one
  could, perhaps, jam the CA [correspondence with Arnauld] itself into
  that procrustean bed. However, it seems plausible that the view of the
  world that Leibniz articulated in response to Arnauld's acute questioning,
  the emphasis on the corporeal substance as the basic building block of the
  world, the recognition of something over and above souls or forms, persists
  through to at least 1704 or so. But I should emphasize once again that the
  Aristotelianism I have been mainly concerned with is not the only strand
  ofthought between 1686 and 1704. The more idealistic strand in Leibniz's
  thought is suggested, for example, in certain writings from 1695 and 1696;
  it surfaces again in 1700, 1702, and 1703, before finally appearing to win
  out in roughly 1704 or 1705. Even the New Essays which, I have argued,
  reflects the Aristotelianism of the CA, shows traces of a more idealistic
  metaphysics. But as unclear as its boundaries are, and as mixed up as it is
  with other strains of thought, it is fair to say that Leibniz's Aristotelianism,
  as I have developed it in the previous sections, remained a live option for
  Leibniz for at least fifteen years after its clear articulation in the CA. 86
Garber is right; the material is ambiguous. R. C. Sleigh, for example, has
done a persuasive job of doing exactly what Garber suggests someone might,
namely, of ''jam[ming] the CA itself into that procrustean bed [of idealism]."
In his insightful commentary on the correspondance between Leibniz and
Arnauld, Sleigh carefully analyzes the various versions of the Discourse Leibniz's autograph version, the fair copy prepared by his amanuensis (with
                                      Historiography of Leibniz Studies       19

Leibniz's corrections), and several shorter versions - and concludes that
the whole perplexing issue of whether corporeal matter actually exists or is
simply a well-founded phenomena arises at repeated points. Sleigh believes
that Leibniz was well on his way to taking the position that the only true
substances were immaterial, soul-like entities in 1686-87. 87 Yet he points
out how confusing and contradictory the Discourse is on this point: sections
11 and 12 of the Discourse deny that all substances are spiritual, affirming
that some are corporeal in nature, while sections 14 and 15 take the opposite
position (especially in the autograph version), presenting a phenomenalistic
account of the interaction of substances. 88 Because of this confusion Sleigh
does not claim that the Discourse is the Monadology, although he thinks many
of the later ideas are sketched there. 89
   The debate about whether or not Leibniz was a phenomenalist is too
extensive to review in this monograph,9o although I will return to it when
discussing Catherine Wilson's book on Leibniz's metaphysics. But the very
fact that scholars can so radically disagree about such a basic aspect of
Leibniz's philosophy suggests that there may not be a "yes" or "no" answer.
The solution I propose is that the question is more meaningful from a modern
point of view than it was for Leibniz. For, to expand on the idea first suggested
by Butts, Leibniz was neither a realist nor a phenomenalist; he was an idealist
and a gnostic idealist at that. As I will argue (especially in the last four
chapters), Leibniz absorbed many ideas from the kabbalistic philosophy of
van Helmont, the most important of which was that soul (or mind) and matter
are opposite ends of a continuum. Soul represents activity, while matter is
simply a term for whatever impedes or hinders this activity. Matter is therefore
essentially a passive force, a negation of reality, rather than anything real in
itself. This position was a basic aspect of van Helmont's kabbalistic thought,
but it could also be interpreted as a return to the original philosophy of
Aristotle, before the Scholastics interpreted him in the light of Christian
mind-body dualism. For unlike Platonic or Christian vitalism, Aristotelian
vitalism is not dualistic since the form of an entity (the immanent pattern
or essence that brings potentiality to actuality) is inseparable from it. 91 In
this important way Aristotle and the Kabbalah reinforced each other. What
is especially interesting is that these two strands were woven together in
the thinking of Francis Mercury van Helmont. Van Helmont's father was
strongly influenced by the Aristotelian concept of form when he formulated
his doctrine of the archeus, that internal principle within each entity that
determined what it would be (I will discuss the elder van Helmont's views
and their influence at greater length in chapters three and seven). Thus,
the changes in Leibniz's concept of substance remarked upon by Garber as
occurring in the 1690s, which he interprets as indicating a move towards
20       Chapter One

phenomenalism and which I interpret as a move towards Gnosticism, could
conceivably have been encouraged by Leibniz's association with the younger
van Helmont. As I mentioned before, Leibniz was in close contact with him
from 1694 until his death in 1698.
   In her book, Leibniz's Metaphysics: A historical and comparative study,
Catherine Wilson agrees with those who see a profound difference between
the Discourse and the Monadology. Although she agrees with Garber in
thinking that Leibniz was tempted by phenomenalism and even succumbed
to it at times, she does not think he ever fully accepted the doctrine.
   Far from being the best or even an adequate representation of Leibniz's
mature philosophy, Wilson argues that the Discourse is not a system at all
but an amalgamation of three different and often incompatible metaphysics:
metaphysic A dealing with the theory of individual substance based on a
logic of descriptions; metaphysic B offering a theory of bodies and corporeal
substances inspired by scholastic theology but with the addition of vis viva;
and metaphysic C presenting a theory of pre-established harmony close to
Malebranche's system. Wilson comments on this hodge-podge: " ... although
C, despite its independent origins fits together well with A, and although A
and B also show points of parallelism, the combination of A, B, C ruins the
attempt at coherence.,,92 In her view, it is only in the following two decades
that Leibniz arrives at his monadology, and he only does this by discarding
key elements of the Discourse:
     Leibniz's first attempt to put down his thoughts in organized form, the
     so-called Discourse on Metaphysics of 1686, is shown not to constitute a
     system at all, but a superposition of three independent system-fragments
     or semi-systems. It is a work both polemical and conciliatory, informed by
     natural philosophy, logic, and theology in equal measure, but it does not
     represent Leibniz's final scheme. It is only in the following two decades
     that the picture presented in the Monadology is worked out piece by piece,
     as Leibniz discards part of the Discourse and tries to come to terms with
     the implications of what is left. 93
Thus, Wilson sees a real evolution in Leibniz's philosophy after 1686. Arguing
along lines similar to Garber, she rejects the idea that the concept of monads
was implicit in the Discourse since in this work Leibniz still accepts the real
nature of matter:
     Though it is agreed that Leibniz did not introduce the term "monad" into
     his own writing until 1695-96, many commentators regard monads as
     implicitly present in the earlier treatise. This is a view we will dispute ...
     arguing that the monad needs to be distinguished from both the individual
     substances and the corporeal substances of the earlier work. ..
                                       Historiography of Leibniz Studies       21

  For a time in Leibniz's thi~king corporeal substances appear to co-exist
  with monads. Later his hand is forced and only monads are said to be real.
  For the Leibniz of the Arnauld correspondence, corporeal substances serve
  as a hedge against a pure phenomenalism which in the end, despite a good
  deal of resistance, he is no longer able to avoid. 94
   Although this passage suggests that Wilson agrees with Garber in thinking
that Leibniz embraced phenomenalism at the end of his life, in other passages,
and for good reasons, she maintains that he did not. For one thing, a purely
phenomenalist position is not consistent with his dynamics, which ascribes
real force to bodies.
   It is nevertheless impossible to suppose that Leibniz held to a pure phenomenalism when he was not under severe pressure. It is true that around
   1703 he stopped trying to reconcile monads and corporeal substance. But
   though he found unparadoxical the view that harmony demanded only a
   correlation of phenomena, in which case there were only minds and their
   contents and nothing either "external" or "internal", nor any correspondence with things outside, this view conflicted with other doctrines such
   as the activity of substance. 95
Another reason why Wilson objects to the idea that Leibniz embraced phenomenalism is that it would have undercut his objection to Cartesian dualism,
which rested on his insistence that souls are always attached to bodies. For if
the two could be thought of separately, Leibniz was convinced the way was
open for materialism and atheism. In addition, since perception is an essential
function of Leibnizian monads, monads must have bodies, for how could they
perceive without organs of perception?96 This is a point we shall come back
to because it offers one explanation for why Leibniz ghosted van Helmont's
last book.
   Another equally important reason why Leibniz never embraced phenomenalism was that it would have undermined his theodicy, for "the best" implied
a plenum, which meant that God made every conceivable kind of substance
with infinitely varying degrees of perception. In other words, human perceptions were not the only perceptions and the universe was not made for man
alone. As Leibniz says:
  I believe that there is in every body a kind of sense and appetite, or soul,
  and furthermore, that to ascribe a substantial form and perception, of a
  soul, to man alone is as ridiculous as to believe that everything has been
  made for man alone and that the earth is the centre of the universe. 97
Wilson attributes Leibniz's changing view of substance from the static one of
the Discourse to the dynamic view of his later writings to a shift in his thinking
from logic and analysis to biology and dynamics. She argues that instead of
22       Chapter One

looking at the world sub specie aetemitatis, as he does in the Discourse,
Leibniz altered his perspective to that of the living and constantly changing
individual. Consequently, Leibniz gave up his definition of substance in terms
of subject-predicate logic for a definition in terms of force and activity. She
believes that this change is already noticeable by 1690, which, in her mind,
effectively eliminates the possible influence of van Helmont:
     ... Couturat was right to stress that force plays no definite metaphysical
     role in the Discourse. Despite the hints about the importance of force for
     refuting the Cartesian conception of substance, the Discourse looks at the
     world sub specie aetemitatis, and the conception of the individual is, as a
     result, anything but dynamic. God sees the whole plan of the individual's
     life; his experiences and movements occur to him in a certain order, as a
     consequence of his definition. The Monadology, by contrast, begins with
     the monad and not with God. The emphasis is on the changes within it,
     which are said to take place according to an inner principle of development.
     Having dropped subject-predicate logic as a basis for a theory of substance,
     Leibniz has turned to other models: to the stored-up potential and released
     energy of seemingly inanimate objects, to the physical development of a
     living creature, and to the production of thought in the mind. This shift is
     already apparent by 1690. To Fardella, Leibniz explains that it is from the
     nature of substances or their "primitive power" (not their concepts!) that
     their "series of operations" follows. In effect, notions which are peripheral
     in the Discourse, better elaborated in the Arnauld correspondence of 168687, assume center-stage from 1690 onwards, and an objective comparison
     of the vocabularies of the Discourse and the Monadology confirms the
     impression that logical content has been expunged from the latter work. 98
Wilson speculates about the reason for Leibniz's change from a static to a
dynamic perspective and concludes that it was a fundamental part of his
rejection of both the Cartesian theory of matter and the Cartesian theory of
occasionalism (represented especially by Malebranche). In Leibniz's view,
both led to determinism and to the demeaning view that God must continually
interfere in nature to ensure the correspondence between what is perceived
and what actually happens. To avoid these dangerous conclusions, substance
must be active in its own right.
   But what precisely led him to his doctrine of monads? Like Aiton, Wilson
thinks that Leibniz may have been influenced by the microscopic studies of
Leeuwenhoek, Swammerdam, Malpighi, and others: "Very likely the idea
of animal corpuscles was introduced to him as early as 1676 on the return
from his brief visit in England via Holland.,,99 But she admits that monads
are very different from micro-organisms: "Monads ... are not visible through
microscopes, and not resolvable into collections of smaller bodies, so that
                                     Historiography of Leibniz Studies      23

these small creatures are not to be identified with them." 100 Therefore, other
influences must be sought, and Wilson turns to the Cambridge Platonists. In
a passage which I obviously endorse, Wilson says:
  Leibniz's relations with the Cambridge Platonists More and Cudworth,
  and those connected with them such as Anne Conway, the gifted student of
  More's, and F. M. van Helmont, son of the famous chemist, need ... more
  critical attention than they have received. 101
Wilson believes that the term "monad" came from the Cambridge Platonists Leibniz had read More's Enchiridion Metaphysicum, where the term is used,
as early as 1679 - but she rejects any possible influence of van Helmont on
two grounds: first, Leibniz did not take his thought seriously; and secondly,
his influence would have come too late: "Thus, although the term [monad]
almost certainly stems from the Cambridge group, it is unlikely that Leibniz
appropriated it from F. M. van Helmont (who visited him in 1696) as is
sometimes stated." She adds in a footnote: "Leibniz was fond of van Helmont
but considered him eccentric and did not believe much of what he said. In
any case, 1696 is too late.,,102 As I will show in chapter three, not only did
Leibniz value what van Helmont said, but van Helmont's first extended visit
to Leibniz occurred in 1694 not 1696. But, even more importantly, Leibniz's
month-long stay in Sulzbach occurred in 1688. Thus Leibniz's first emersion
in the Lurianic Kabbalah occurred during the critical time he was searching
for answers to the penetrating criticisms that Arnauld had raised about his
notion of substance and concept of free will.
    Wilson concludes that the most probable influence on Leibniz was Ralph
Cudworth's True Intellectual System of the Universe (1678). As the foremost
critic of Cartesian philosophy and "the single most important medium for the
transmission of Plotinian and Platonic intellectualism of the period,"103 Cudworth's enormously erudite work was bound to appeal to Leibniz, who read
and annotated it (at least up to page 726) in 1689. Wilson thinks that Leibniz found his solution to the continuum problem in terms of a split between
sensible and intelligible worlds in Cudworth. She juxtaposes passages from
Leibniz New System (1695), where she believes the concept of monads is
first fully established, with passages from Cudworth to show that Leibniz's
distinction between physical, mathematical, and metaphysical points could
have come from Cudworth:
  It is impossible to say whether or not Leibniz's tripartite distinction, and
  his solution to the continuum problem in terms of a split between sensible
  and intelligible worlds, was directly affected by his Cudworth study; but
  this is by far the most likely source, for in the True Intellectual System
  Cudworth discusses the problem of unextended incorporeal substance and
24       Chapter One

     explicitly distinguishes between physical and mathematical minima and
     metaphysical unextendeds. 104
Wilson quotes another passage from Cudworth which sounds as if it could
have been written by Leibniz:
     A Thinker is a Monade, or one Single Substance, and not a Heap of Substances: whereas no Body or Extended thing is One, but Many Substances,
     every Conceivable or Smallest Part thereof being a Real Substance by
     itself. lOS
Wilson thinks that Leibniz may have applied Cudworth's description of the
"Energie of Nature" as an "Obscure and Imperfect Sense or Perception, different from that of Animals ... a kind of Drowsie, Unawakened, or Astonish'd
Cogitation" to monads. 106 While Leibniz definitely had read this last passage
before 1703, Wilson admits that it is impossible to be sure that he read the previous two before this date because the annotations he started in 1689 break off
at page 726. This means that: 1) he may have read them but did not annotate
them; 2) his notes were lost; or 3) he only finished the book in 1703-4. 107 If
the latter is the case, one could use the same argument against Cudworth that
Wilson uses to eliminate van Helmont, namely that 1703 is too late. But even
granting that Leibniz had read all of Cudworth's book, I think there are problems with Wilson's argument, for Cudworth, like Henry More, subscribed
to the concept of "plastic natures," which Leibniz specifically rejected. Both
Cudworth and More advocated the Platonic form of vitalism which was dualistic, not the Aristotelian form I described above, which was monistic. For
Leibniz the problem with "plastic natures" was that they still represented
external causes acting on passive matter. As Wilson says, undermining her
own argument, "These plastic natures were an absolute obstacle to Leibniz's
considering Cudworth as having contributed to his own philosophy.,,108 It
is precisely because both More and Cudworth were Platonic dualists, while
Leibniz was not, that I do not believe either philosopher exerted a decisive
influence in the development of Leibniz's truly radical concept of a monad as
a simple, self-activating unity. But a source was available, and that was van
Helmont's kabbalistic monadology, which was far more radical than either
More's or Cudworth's because it was monistic. Evidence demonstrates that
a chronology of kabbalistic influence existed and contributed to the final
shaping Leibniz's philosophy.
                               CHAPTER TWO

            Van Helmont, Leibniz, and the Kabbalah

One of the first to suggest that Leibniz was influenced by van Helmont was
Heinrich Ritter in 1853. Ritter argued that of all Leibniz's contemporaries, van
Helmont was closest to him both personally and in terms of his thought. 109 R.
W. Meyer also recognized "many intellectual affinities between the two men."
He believed Leibniz had appropriated the term "monad" from van Helmont,
but he did not think that was enough to bridge the vast difference between the
philosophies of the two men. Van Helmont remains in his view an eccentric
mystic and enthusiast, whose ideas form an incoherent jumble, while Leibniz
is the systematic, rational, and logical thinker, who subordinates his mystical
inclinations to scientific ends. Hence, van Helmont's role was to inspire in
Leibniz ideas which he himself could not comprehend. Furthermore, van
Helmont was only one of many contemporaries to influence Leibniz; his
influence was therefore in no way special:
  With Frans Mercurius van Helmont ... Leibniz had many actual interests in
  common, and in spite of a great difference in age there are many intellectual affinities between the two men; and thus Helmont's life and his way of
  thinking deserve somewhat closer attention. For in discussing Helmont's
  thought we hope to bring out once again Leibnitz's many affinities with
  the contemporary ways of thought, and to show that the only thing which
  distinguishes him from other contemporary thinkers is his highly conscious and urgent sense of commitment to the problems of his age .... [Van
  Helmont's] adventurous life is reflected in his writings: a vast collection
  of inventions, plans, prescriptions, formulae and curious calculations on
  past and future events; violent attacks on Descartes, Spinoza and Hobbes;
  sketches for a mechanistic cosmology; empiricist and sensualist theories;
  and cabalistic and mystical theories of number - all these lie jumbled
  up in his countless papers. Yet everything he wrote was inspired by his
  enthusiastic plans for the Academies in which he hoped to see his projects
  executed; and all his projects were conceived with a view to their immediate practical application. His "natural" Hebrew alphabet, for instance,

26       Chapter Two

     was to be used for curing the deaf and dumb; he devised a mechanical
     method for curing scoliosis - claiming that an English woman had opened
     a hospital in London in which the method was used with great success; he
     had cures for every kind of ailment, affliction and debility. Yet the ultimate
     purpose of all his speculations was once again a reunion of the Churches;
     already he saw secret signs of the future Universal Church that would be
     proclaimed in the new century. Leibnitz, though more cautious and sober
     in his hopes, shared Helmont's belief that this future Church could only be
     of permanent benefit to the peoples of Europe if it were armed with all the
     ideas of the new science. In this belief Leibnitz founded in 1700 the Berlin
     Academy. In Helmont's mind (as in Leibnitz's) this scientific chiliasm was
     inextricably linked with philosophical doctrine. The aim was to reconcile
     theology with the "philosophia reformata".
        Basing his views on the separation of the creature from the Creator,
     Helmont claimed that God had created only the seeds of all things. He saw
     God's work as an act of informing and cultivating of these seeds, which
     he called monads; this term Leibnitz took over from Helmont in 1696.
     Helmont's monadology remained little more than a "metaphysical poem";
     and it wasLeibnitz's ambition to solve its many inherent contradictions ...
        In Leibnitz's Monadology we shall find echoes of all these European
     trends of thought: of Helmont, Henry More and Jan Amos Komensky
     (Comenius); of the symbolical language of Plotinus and Nicholas ofCusa,
     whose concept of a universal centre as the point of coincidence of individual centres Leibnitz translated from theology into anthropology and
     biology; and of a number of earlier and contemporary German thinkers. 110

   In his book Leibniz et Spinoza published in 1946, G. Friedmann also recognized that van Helmont and von Rosenroth influenced Leibniz's developing
concept of monads. He takes issue with Foucher de Careil's assertion that
Leibniz utterly rejected kabbalistic thought because of its association with
Spinoza, arguing that, on the contrary, Leibniz was exteremely interested
in the Kabbalah. However, Friedmann does not give especial weight to van
Helmont's influence or to that of the Kabbalah; they simply provided one
of the many strands of occult thought woven into Leibniz's mature philosophy. I will come back to this subject in chapter 3, where I try to show that
Leibniz's connection with van Helmont was far closer and his knowledge of
the Kabbalah far greater than previous scholars, including Friedmann, have
recognized.
   In an article published in 1979 and again in her book The Death of Nature
published the following year Carolyn Merchant returned to the issue. But
instead of arguing for van Helmont's influence on Leibniz, Merchant sees
van Helmont's friend and patroness, Lady Anne Conway, as the real source
                               Van Helmont, Leibniz, and the Kabbalah         27

of inspiration. 111 In her article she argues that Leibniz derived the teon monad
not from van Helmont but from reading Anne Conway's one published book
The Principles of the Most Ancient and Modem Philosophy Concerning God,
Christ and the Creatures. 112
    Anne Conway was a remarkably intelligent and well-educated English Viscountess. Before her marriage to Edward Conway, she had a close relationship
with Henry More. More met her through her brother, one of his students at
Cambridge, and thought so highly of her intelligence that he began to correspond with her and to treat her as "his pupil.,,113 In 1670 More introduced van
Helmont to Lady Conway in the hope that he might be able to alleviate the
painful and debilitating headaches from which she suffered. Much to More's
distress, van Helmont gradually assumed the role of teacher and confidant that
he himself had once played. Throughout the 1670s van Helmont remained
almost constantly with Lady Conway at Ragley Hall, and More was forced
to watch at a distance as van Helmont introduced Lady Conway first to the
Kabbalah and then to Quakerism. 114
    After Lady Conway's death in 1679, Van Helmont arranged for the publication her book. He brought a copy of it to Hanover in 1696. Merchant
argues that it is hardly coincidental that Leibniz first used the teon monad, a
teon used by Lady Conway, shortly after this date. Although Merchant was
mistaken and did not realize that Leibniz first used the teon monad in 1695,115
her argument might still stand in as much as Leibniz had met van Helmont
in 1694, and there is evidence to prove that they discussed van Helmont's
philosophy, which, as I will argue, was the source for that of Lady Conway.
Merchant points out the similarities between Lady Conway's and Leibniz's
philosophy in teons of their vitalism, monism, and belief that within each
creature there is an infinity of other creatures organized as a hierarchy of
monads. Merchant does not press her case too far. She points out the important differences between Lady Conway and Leibniz. For example, Leibniz's
pre-established harmony was very different from Lady Conway's belief that
spirits and matter could interpenetrate and act on each other. Nor did Leibniz
accept Lady Conway's belief in metempsychosis. The bottom line of Merchant's argument is that Lady Conway and van Helmont reinforced ideas
Leibniz already had; they did not shape his thinking so much as corroborate
it. Hence their theories "converged": 116

  The basic elements that went into Leibniz's concept of the monad had been
  well developed by 1686, the crucial year of synthesis in which the main
  tenets of his philosophy were laid out in the Discourse on Metaphysics, the
  correspondence with Arnauld, and the "Brief Demonstration of a Notable
  Error of Descartes .... " By then he had set out the concept of an individual
  substance whose essence was perception and activity, the animation of mat28       Chapter Two

     ter, the concept of the organic continuity of life, the idea of pre-established
     harmony, and the metaphor of each soul mirroring the universe from its own
     point of view. He had read the work of the Cartesians, Scholastics, microscopists, and the Cambridge Platonists. During the decade 1686-1696,
     he refined many of these fundamental ideas and developed his system of
     dynamics in more detail. In addition he read and incorporated into his
     philosophy ideas from Chinese Philosophy, Maimonides, and the Cabala.
     The writings of Francis Mercury van Helmont and Anne Conway served
     to confirm and buttress his vitalistic view of nature and to stimulate the
     coalescence of his ideas into a "monadology.,,117
Merchant's case is a fairly weak one because it gives too much importance
to Lady Conway and not enough to van Helmont, a subject I will return to in
the last three chapters. lIS Furthermore, Merchant's analysis fails to account
for why Leibniz went to Sulzbach in 1688 and why he stayed there for a full
month.
   In suggesting a "convergence" of ideas Merchant's thesis anticipated that
put forward by Stuart Brown both in his book on Leibniz published in 1984
and in a more recent article, "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle," in
which he too probes a possible kabbalistic influence on Leibniz's thought:
  Convergence is a generally recognized fact of intellectual history and it
  is curious that Leibniz's name is associated with one of the most remarkable cases of it in mathematics. The points of convergence I have been
  attempting to highlight, because they depend on shared perspectives what Leibniz called "belles pensees" - are perhaps less remarkable. It is
  reasonable to expect that those who share what may loosely be called
  a common philosophical culture will sometimes arrive independently at
  strikingly similar conclusions to their thinking. That is so ... in the case
  of the doctrine that every particle of matter contains a world of infinitely
  many creatures. It is also true of certain theories of emanation. These are,
  however, only two examples of convergence between Leibniz's philosophy and those of members of More's circle. I have tried to suggest that
  such convergences are not necessarily reducible to the direct influence of
  one person on another but are what might be expected to occur when two
  philosophers, with similar predilections, face similar problems with similar
  resources and similar constraints. 119
Although Brown argues, as Merchant does, for a convergence between Leibniz's philosophy and the Kabbalah rather than any direct influence, he thinks
that whatever convergence existed was between Leibniz and van Helmont's
thought, not Leibniz's and Lady Conway's or Leibniz's and Henry More's,
which has also been suggested. 120 (I cannot help commenting here that in
                              Van Helmont, Leibniz, and the Kabbalah        29

denying any causal connection both Merchant and Brown speak the language
of pre-established harmony!) In Brown's opinion, too much weight has been
put on Leibniz's use of the word "monad" in the late 1690s. He rejects the
supposed influence of Lady Conway in this regard, arguing that Leibniz could
not have read her book,121 and, in any case, in Brown's opinion Leibniz's
use of the term was simply a tactical ploy and not indicative of a substantive
change in his thinking:
  Those who have claimed that Leibniz's monadology is derivative from that
  of Anne Conway have usually been mistaken as to the period of Leibniz's
  formative development, wrongly supposing this to have been the 1690s,
  after Conway's Principles had been published. Too much significance has
  been attached to Leibniz's adoption of the word "monad" in the late 1690s.
  There is little doubt that Leibniz, in choosing this word, was aware of its
  use by Henry More or his Cabbalistic associates and its wider use in the
  Neoplatonic tradition. I think it was important to him that the word already
  had some currency and indeed that in using it he was trading on some of
  its Neoplatonic connotations not only of a "true unity" but also as the kind
  of unity from which the plura entia of the material world result. But in
  the first published work in which he adopted the term in 1698 a monad is
  a substantial principle much equivalent to soul or substantial form. And
  at least one major reason for making more of the word "monad" in his
  later writings was that Leibniz came to acknowledge that he would not
  be taken seriously by many of his readers if he insisted on appearing to
  endorse discredited scholastic doctrines like that of substantial forms. But
  Leibniz aimed to be multilingual between the jargons of the competing
  philosophical sects. So his adoption of the word "monad" should not be
  seen as in itself a major development. It may at least betoken his perception
  that Neoplatonism was making something of a comeback. But he was in
  substance a monodologist from around 1686 onwards and showed some
  tendencies in that direction earlier. 122
Following Russell, Aiton, and others, Brown's basic position is that the key
period in the development of Leibniz's philosophy is the decade between
1676 and 1686, not the 1690s, and that this virtually precludes any direct
influence of van Helmont, Lady Conway, or kabbalistic ideas in general on
Leibniz's thought:
  Leibniz regarded the writing of his Discourse on Metaphysics (early 1686)
  as the point at which he had arrived at his system. In defense of his New
  System which was published in 1695, Leibniz claimed that he had observed
  a rule of Horace's in deferring publication for nine years. Although there
  are modifications, some of them important, to Leibniz's system after 1686,
30       Chapter Two

     they are mostly introduced by 1695. The formative decade for Leibniz was
     1676-86, not twenty years later. 123
However, even in this quote, Brown admits there were some important modifications in Leibniz's thought, modifications Brown describes. For example,
Leibniz's theory of substance was not fully worked out in the Discourse:
     Leibniz's theory of substance was not fully worked out the Discourse ...
     In the Discourse he did not set out to decide whether, in metaphysical
     exactness, it was admissable to speak of "corporeal substances." His consideration of these questions, as we shall see in the next two chapters, was
     to lead him to make significant modifications in his theory.124
He repeats this point in his later article:
   In the Discourse, however, Leibniz did not espouse the doctrine that in
   every particle of matter there is a world of infinitely many creatures. And
   indeed that doctrine, taken as a commitment to a monadology of sorts, is
   inconsistent with the assumption made in the Discourse that there can be
   corporeal substances in the ordinary sense. 125
Brown recognizes the increasingly immaterial and phenomenalist nature of
Leibniz's view of substance:
  The transition from the "substantial forms" (principles of substantial unity)
  of the Discourse to the "monads" (immaterial atoms) of the later writings
  may be partly a change to a less objectionable terminology. But it also
  reflects a change in priorities and indeed a significant modification of
  Leibniz's system. For, whereas the author of the Discourse attempted
  to explain how there could be material substance, Leibniz later came to
  believe that, strictly speaking, at least, there were no such substances. 126
Brown also notes that Leibniz's ideas about the continuum developed to
the point that he no longer made a distinction between human and nonhuman souls, which in tum reinforced his evolving pansychism, and that his
rejection of the reality of space and time put him firmly at odds with most
scientists and philosophers, especially the Newtonians. Brown admits that in
these important ways Leibniz's thinking changed "significantly,',127 although
he says that these changes are difficult to trace, and thus, by implication,
difficult to account for:
  Leibniz's changing views about matter, space, time and the labyrinth of the
  continuum after he wrote the Discourse are difficult to trace in detail. But
  the tendency of his thought is in what can be called a "phenomenalistic"
  direction, i.e. to explain matter, space and time in terms of the perceptions
  of monads. Material substances are reduced to well-founded phenomena
  as also are space and time. 128
                               Van Helmont, Leibniz, and the Kabbalah          31

As I have already suggested and will attempt to demonstrate, it is precisely in
these areas that the kabbalistic theories of Francis Mercury van Helmont had
a direct impact. But in order to substantiate this claim, dates are crucial. For
if Leibniz's philosophy was not substantially formulated by 1686 but continued to develop through the 1690s, then van Helmont's influence is arguable.
Although Brown describes the decade between 1676 and 1686 as Leibniz's
formative period, he, like Aiton, undermines his own argument. We have also
 seen that other scholars disagree with Brown entirely and reject the idea that
the Discourse can be taken as the first statement of Leibniz's mature philosophy. Catherine Wilson takes this position, arguing that Leibniz's concept of
 substance began to change substantially in the 1690s and that the basic ideas
 of his monadology were only in place by 1696. Daniel Garber agrees but
thinks the decisive date by which Leibniz had fully formulated his mature
 theory of substance was later, around 1704 or 1705. Since even those who
 believe the Discourse marked the emergence of Leibniz's mature philosophy
 admit there were significant changes in his thought after it was written, it is
clear that Leibniz's philosophy did change in the 1690s and that consequently
 van Helmont could have exercised an influence. By suggesting 1696 as the
date when Leibniz's concept of monads was fully developed, Wilson makes
my argument a bit harder to sustain, although not impossible, since she was
not aware of the full extent of Leibniz's contacts with van Helmont, or that
 van Helmont's first prolonged meeting with Leibniz was in 1694, not 1696.
And she does not take into account his earlier meeting with von Rosenroth in
 1688.
    Anne Becco is the first scholar in recent years to propose that Francis
Mercury van Helmont had a decisive influence on Leibniz. In several articles
written between 1975 and 1978 she conclusively proves from a detailed
analysis of Leibniz's autograph manuscripts that Leibniz secretly wrote van
Helmont's last book, Quaedam praemeditatae & consideratae Cogitationes
super Quatuor priora Capita Libri Moysis, Genesis nominati... (Thoughts on
Genesis), which basically restated and summarized van Helmont's cherished
kabbalistic ideas.
   It might be objected that even if Leibniz did ghost van Helmont's last
book, this need not mean that he accepted van Helmont's ideas. It might
simply offer one more example of Leibniz's interest in all kinds of ideas,
even those he rejected, as well as his willingness to help his friends. 129 In the
remaining chapters I will present evidence to show that this objection cannot
be sustained. Leibniz spent far more time thinking about van Helmont's
theories than necessary for someone simply trying to be helpful. As I hope
to persuade the reader, Leibniz was interested enough in van Helmont's
kabbalistic theories to incorporate certain of them into his own philosophy.
32       Chapter Two

   While Becco does not go as far as I do, she argues that Leibniz's collaboration with van Helmont indicates that their relationship was far closer than has
been realized. In her opinion, van Helmont re-activated Platonic and vitalistic
ideas about substance absorbed by Leibniz in his youth during a key period
in the development of his mature system, the years between 1694 and 1696:
     The philosophical interest of van Helmont is central to the work of Leibniz
     on account of the influence it had between 1694 and 1696, the key moment
     in the establishment of the definitive Leibnizian system. 130
In her opinion, Leibniz essentially "rationalized" van Helmont. Since Leibniz
was fully aware of the mystical and magical uses to which various monadologies had been put in the past, he was cautious in introducing these concepts
and careful to keep his distance from van Helmont, at least in public:
      ... the role of van Helmont, a role of re-activating the vocabulary and
     knowledge that Leibniz knew well in his youth ... is so important... But
     it was a question of rationalizing these "monadmagics" ... It was precisely
     because the concepts of a simple substance and monad had a past loaded
     with irrationalism and atomism that Leibniz only timidly dared to employ
     them before admitting them definitively into his vocabulary.131
Like Wilson, Becco flatly disagrees with those who think Leibniz's mature
philosophy was virtually in place by 1686 or 1687, either in the Discourse or
his correspondence with Amauld. 132 In her view the Discourse is no Monado logy. What distinguishes the two works is not simply their terminology, as
Brown has suggested, because this very difference in terminology created a
substantive change in Leibniz's philosophy. Becco argues that when Leibniz
introduced the word "monad," he introduced a new concept of substance,
and this was the reason for Leibniz's shift from realism to idealism. In the
Discourse Leibniz still identifies being with thought. Hence only humans are
actual substances. It is not until Leibniz substitutes force for thinking that
his philosophy frees itself from all traces of Cartesian dualism and that his
concept of universal harmony is possible. But even more importantly, Becco
argues that the idea of the "simplicity" and "unity" of substance, which is
such an important aspect of monads, does not appear in the Discourse. As
Becco says:
     ... one can no longer see the Discourse as a potential Monadology because
     the idea of the simplicity of substance, with all that implies in terms
     of Leibnizian ontology, is not found in it. Indeed, we have known for
     a long time that Leibniz did not use the word "monad" there [in the
     Discourse], a word which only appeared between the years 1694-1696.
     But it is important to emphasize that the monad is not a "substance." It is a
     "simple substance." In the Discourse, which only speaks of "individual,"
                               Van Helmont, Leibniz, and the Kabbalah         33

  "singular," or "particular" substance, qualifications which are not found in
  the Monadology, the "simplicity" of substance is never mentioned. Even
  the unity of substance is not mentioned... In addition to the single difference
  in terminology, there is the assembly of monodological themes that define
  the concept of "simple." The most striking omission in the Discourse is
  the rupture on the ontological plane, since the souls of animals appear as
  the opposite of positively radiating [i.e. thinking] spirits. In refining the
  qualities of substance, Leibniz overturns the Discourse on Metaphysics,
  purifies it of scholastic logic and emancipates it from these vestiges of
  Cartesian ism. 133

Becco identifies 1695 as the crucial year for these significant changes in Leibniz's philosophy, for that was the first year in which Leibniz used the word
"monad," not 1696 as is generally thought. 134 Becco identifies van Helmont
as the catalyst in this significant transformation. Through his contact with
van Helmont during the crucial period between 1694 and 1696 Leibniz was
brought back into contact with Platonic, neoplatonic, Hermetic and, especially, kabbalistic thought. As Becco points out, from his youth Leibniz had
absorbed a variety of sources which brought up the concept of monads in various ways (among these sources were Plotinus, Cusanus, Bruno, Campanella,
Weigel, More, Cudworth, and von Rosenroth1 35 ), but it was through his close
personal contact with van Helmont that Leibniz rediscovered the concept of
monad, which he subsequently tailored to his own purpose.
   Becco significantly overstates the case. As R. C. Sleigh has convincingly
argued, the issue of the unity of a substance was a central preoccupation of
Leibniz's at the time he corresponded with Arnauld (1686-87), and there
were already clear signs that Leibniz was moving in the direction of a phenomenalistic view of matter. 136 But, as we have seen, even Sleigh does not
argue that the Monadology was fully in place in the Discourse.
   This does seem to be the consensus reached by most modem scholars
of Leibniz, and one I share, namely that although important elements of
Leibniz's Monadology can be found in his earlier work, and particularly
in the Discourse, there are ambiguities and contradictions which show that
Leibniz was still wrestling with basic philosophical issues. For example, the
idea of force as the defining characteristic of substance, while suggested in the
Discourse, is not as centrally important there as it is in the Monadology. It is
not as important because Leibniz still defines substance primarily in terms of
perception, not force, and thus differentiates between perceiving, or spiritual
matter, and mindless, corporeal matter. As Wilson points out, the Discourse
also offers the definition of substance in terms of subject-predicate logic;
hence, a static definition of substance vies with the dynamic one characteristic
of Leibniz's later philosophy. Leibniz's theodicy also seems to me to be at a
34     Chapter Two

rudimentary stage in the Discourse. In section 30 Leibniz brings up Judas and
tries to explain why God would create him fully knowing what he was bound
to do. He attempts to justify God's action with several weak and unoriginal
arguments: 1) that a greater good ultimately derives from evil acts; 2) that the
problem of evil is simply too difficult for humans to understand; and 3) that
evil comes from limitation, that it is essentially "nothingness," an argument
often used by Platonists and Neoplatonists. According to many commentators,
Leibniz never gets beyond these timid solutions and, consequently, never
provides a viable theodicy. I will come back to this question in chapter six,
where I argue that Leibniz's arguments justifying God change significantly
under the impact of the Kabbalah, and that these new arguments do produce
a successful theodicy. There are other ideas in the Discourse which point
in the direction of Leibniz's later philosophy. For example, in section 14 he
describes creation in terms of emanation and makes the suggestive analogy
between creation and thought. As I will argue, this is a basic idea in van
Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy, and it is an idea that Leibniz takes up more
fully later as a result of his association with van Helmont.
   For all these reasons, I agree with Becco that historians should look carefully at Leibniz's kabbalistic sources: "Leibniz's kabbalistic sources during
this period of the crystallization of the terminology of the monad deserves to
be carefully considered.,,137 Although I believe she has overstated her case
and sees too great a break between Leibniz's philosophy in the 1680s and
what emerged after 1694, she raises important issues. By proving beyond a
doubt that Leibniz ghosted van Helmont's last book and wrote the preface
to another,138 she produces far stronger evidence than previous historians for
van Helmont and Leibniz's close relationship.
   In recent years one other scholar, Bernardino Qrio de Miguel, has come
back to the question of van Helmont's relationship to Leibniz. He argues
that van Helmont "was intellectually closer to Leibniz than any other of
his contemporaries," and that it was only the strange and obscure way he
presented his ideas that "unjustifiably allowed van Helmont to sink into
oblivion.,,139 Qrio de Miguel points out the many similarities between the
two thinkers. Both attempt to steer a middle course between mechanism and
pantheism; both define substance in terms of awareness and perception; and
harmony and organic continuity are important concepts in the philosophy of
both men.
   With this review of what other scholars have thought about the relationship
between van Helmont and Leibniz in place, what remains to be done is to
show precisely which kabbalistic ideas and which kabbalistic texts influenced
Leibniz. This requires a close look at Leibniz's correspondence during these
crucial years and an analysis of his involvement in van Helmont's work.
                              CHAPTER THREE

                    Leibniz and Van Helmont:
                Their Friendship and Collaboration

In order to establish the influence of van Helmont on Leibniz it is important
to dispel the general opinion that van Helmont was something of a lovable
buffoon, tolerated but hardly taken seriously by Leibniz (or by any other intelligent person). Manuscript evidence proves beyond doubt that Leibniz was a
careful reader of van Helmont's books as well as an attentive listener to his
conversation. He wrote extensive analyses and critical commentaries about
van Helmont's opinions, mostly for the benefit of his patron, the Electress
Sophie of Brunswick and Hanover. A close look at these letters and memoranda reveals that while analyzing van Helmont's various theories about God,
souls, matter, the divine attributes, pre-existence, the transmigration of souls,
and the rationale for sin and suffering, Leibniz modified and adapted his own
theories. There are three key areas in which van Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy had a significant impact on Leibniz: 1) in the development of his concept
of monads; 2) in his evolving ideas about free will and determinism; and 3)
in the formulation of his theodicy. Van Helmont's views also helped to shape
Leibniz's theory of causation in terms of volition. But before substantiating
this influence, the reader must be persuaded that Leibniz did indeed take van
Helmont seriously.
   As I mentioned at the beginning of this study, Leibniz first met van Helmont
in 1671, although he had read two of van Helmont's books earlier as well
as the works of the elder van Helmont. I do not believe we can understand
why Leibniz spent an entire month with von Rosenroth in Sulzbach in 1688
without taking into consideration his earlier meetings with van Helmont,
for it was through van Helmont that Leibniz learned about the Kabbalah
and gained an introduction to von Rosenroth. Leibniz described his initial
meeting with van Helmont in 1671 in a letter to Landgraf Ernst von HessenRheinfels, which I cite below. Two letters dating from the following year
show that Leibniz was very concerned to know exactly where van Helmont
was, presumably so that he could keep in touch. 140 Leibniz met van Helmont

36     Chapter Three

again in 1679, while both were visiting Princess Elizabeth. This was an
important year for two reasons. First, Lady Conway had recently died and
van Helmont had left England with the manuscript of her book, planning to
publish it on the continent. Second, the first volume of the Kabbala Denudata
had appeared two years earlier, and van Helmont was en route to Sulzbach
to help von Rosenroth complete the second volume, which appeared in 1684.
It is difficult to imagine that Leibniz and van Helmont did not discuss the
Kabbalah or Lady Conway during their meeting in Herford in 1679. Leibniz
had been in correspondence with von Rosenroth in the intervening period,
and it was through von Rosenroth that he obtained copies of two of Boyle's
works. The so-called mechanical philosophy would, therefore, have been a
natural topic for discussion, especially since they were in the presence of
Princess Elizabeth, famous for her correspondence with Descartes. Both van
Helmont and Leibniz rejected the Cartesian view of matter and the mechanical
philosophy on the grounds of their materialistic and atheistic implications.
Van Helmont had already written a dialogue (published in 1677 in the first
volume of the Kabbala Denudata), in which he presented a totally different
concept of matter and significantly used the term "monad." As I will argue
at a later stage, I believe this text had a significant impact on Leibniz. It is
difficult to believe that as Leibniz and van Helmont met and talked at the
bedside of the sick princess, they did not discuss these matters. The closeness
of their subsequent contact (which I describe in detail in this chapter), taken
together with Leibniz's long stay in Sulzbach, makes this a virtual certainty.
    There is one piece of evidence from this period - a letter written by Leibniz
to Landgraf Ernst van Hessen-Rheinfels in 1681 - that could be taken to
invalidate my claim because Leibniz fails to mention meeting van Helmont
in 1679 and only refers to their earlier meeting. I quote this letter because
it shows how carefully Leibniz kept up with van Helmont's movements and
activities - he had heard on the grapevine that van Helmont had become a
Quaker, which was true - as well as his respect for him:
  ... I have learned that M. Helmont is presently there [Sul~bach] with someone named M. Kohlhas, who passes as an adept, which means, according
  the terminology of the chemists, that he knows how to make the philosopher's stone ... As for M. Helmont, I am told that he is entirely QUakerized,
  and that he does not bare his head when he speaks to princes. I have a hard
  time believing this because when I used to speak to him fairly often and
  familiarly eight years ago, he seemed to me entirely reasonable and since
  then I have esteemed him highly. Indeed, it is quite enough to have been
  put to the test of the Inquisition. 141
The fact that Leibniz did not mention discussing Kabbalistic theories with van
Helmont two years before this letter was written does not necessarily mean
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration           37

that such discussions never occurred. It could simply be that for reasons of
prudence Leibniz kept certain matters to himself. Religion was an explosive
issue at the time, and dabbling in such esoteric matters as the Jewish Kabbalah
could be hazardous, as van Helmont's earlier imprisonement by the Inquisition on the charge of "judaizing" makes abundantly clear. Furthermore, the
Landgraf was a leading Catholic and although he was extraordinarily tolerant and ecumenical in his outlook, he was anxious to convert Leibniz to
Catholicism. 142
   A similar sense of prudence may explain why Leibniz tends to offer a
disclaimer whenever he discusses van Helmont's opinions. We have already
seen one of these in the letter to Morell, in which Leibniz praises van Helmont for his interest in natural philosophy but dissociates himself from his
unorthodox views. It is this which has led scholars to assume mistakenly that
van Helmont's influence was minimal. A typical example of such a disclaimer
appears in a letter written to Thomas Smith (1638-1710), the English divine
and biblical scholar, in February, 1695. It is clear from what Leibniz says
that he likes and respects van Helmont, but he makes a point of dissociating
himself from van Helmont's more extreme ideas:
  Among the Dutch wonderful things concerning religion and philosophy are
  being published, thanks to the zeal and work of Helmont, who appears to
  wish to surpass the unusual medical theories of his father with paradoxes
  based on other evidence. He takes many things from the Jewish Kabbala
  and the marvelous tales of the chemists. To these the strange opinions of
  your Quakers and those of Holland are added, as well as certain unusual
  thoughts of your Henry More and our Christian Knorr and many other
  famous men, whom he has known for a long time. From these he now puts
  together a new body of teachings. He has determined that all things are
  created by the Messiah as the medium between God and his creatures. He
  reckons astonishingly in terms of chronology that the souls of ancestors
  will re-enter the bodies of their descendants. He says that the original soul
  of Adam was taken on by the Messiah. He has other ideas no less unusual
  than these, which do not disagree with the opinions of a certain shrewd
  countryman of yours [Robert Fludd], who thinks that the poisonous and
  corporeal seed of the serpent scattered among us is corrected and destroyed
  by some irradiations or balm of the body of Christ. These are the fruits of
  a corrupt free thinking. How difficult it is to hold a middle course between
  persecution and license .... 143
To my mind it is significant that in this last sentence Leibniz mentions "persecution," for he knew all the details of van Helmont's two-year imprisonment
by the Inquisition. Every thinking person in the Counter-Reformation period
was fully aware of how dangerous it was to express or appear to condone
38       Chapter Three

opinions that might be considered heretical (from a wide variety of denominational perspectives!). Prudence might therefore be the simple explanation for
why such disclaimers appears in virtually all of Leibniz's public references to
van Helmont. Another example is given in a letter to Thomas Burnett, written
in March 1696:
     For the past few days M. Helmont has been here with us. He and I meet
     every morning at about 9 o'clock in the study of Madame the Electress.
     M. Helmont takes the desk and I am the listener. From time to time I
     question him because he has difficulty explaining himself clearly. He has
     some very extraordinary opinions. But for all that I find he has very good
     ideas about practical matters and that he would be overjoyed to contribute
     to the general good, in which I entirely agree with him. He was a close
     friend of Madame, the Countess of Kennaway [Anne Conway], and he has
     told the history of this extraordinary lady. He has also spoken to me often
     about M. Henry Morus, who was also one of his friends. 144
Leibniz obviously thought highly enough of van Helmont to arrange daily
meetings with him in the presence of the Electress Sophie so that he could
question van Helmont more carefully about his opinions. And yet he adds that
some of van Helmont's opinions are "extraordinary," a rather mild comment
to be sure. Again, one might well ask to what extent Leibniz was simply
protecting himself?
   Even with this expressed reservation, these morning meetings impressed
Leibniz sufficiently to mention them in two other letters, one to Adam Kochanski, the other to Vincent Placcius. I quote the one to Kochanski because it
specifically refers to van Helmont's reputation as an alchemist. According
to Becco, it was the belief that van Helmont possessed the secret of transmutation that largely accounts for the interest shown in van Helmont, even
by Leibniz.145 But as this letter makes clear, van Helmont did not profess
special alchemical knowledge. Furthermore, during the period of his closest
contact with van Helmont (between 1694 and 1698) Leibniz was well aware
of the fact that van Helmont neither possessed the philosopher's stone nor the
universal medicine, or so-called elixir of life. 146 In fact, judging from a letter
Leibniz wrote in 1680, he had known from his first meeting with van Helmont
that van Helmont was himself sceptical of alchemical claims. 147 This did not,
however, lessen his respect for van Helmont's skill in chemistry or medicine.
     It has been almost two weeks that Franciscus Mercurius Helmont, whom
     I've known for nearly twenty-five years, has been here. I conferred with
     him almost daily in the study of the Electress of Brunswick about various
     matters. He spoke about alchemy modestly, not promising great things and
     suggesting that whoever believed in this should rather tum his attention to
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration            39

  something else. As for the rest, he has very extraordinary notions and his
  company is very agreeable to me. He hopes to visit again when he returns,
  which would be most welcome to us, but he is so old that the world of
  men can scarcely promise him strength for much longer, for he is nearly
  eighty. 148

Leibniz's description of some of van Helmont's ideas as "extraordinary"
explains why most scholars have taken van Helmont as a unstable enthusiast,
whose ideas either baffled or amused people. Even Anne Becco says that most
people rightly dismissed van Helmont as a "farfelu sans grande valeur."149
She gives the example of Baron Dobrzenski, who confided to Leibniz that had
it not been for the excellent truffles sent by the Electress of Hanover, van Helmont's visit and conversation about the soul would have sent him to sleep. ISO
According to Becco, even Leibniz was not immune to the same sentiments.
In her view, Leibniz "reveals himself as a biting critic" of van Helmont. She
remarks on Leibniz's propensity for making sarcastic comments and jokes at
van Helmont's expense, particularly about the theory of transmigration:
   Leibniz reveals himself as a biting critic when, for example, he says how
   happy he is that van Helmont has found in Buchius a man who can explain
   his ideas in an intelligible manner; he willingly jokes about the "reveries
   of the deceased M. van Helmont." Transmigration especially excited his
   sarcasm. These "extraordinary and perhaps allegorical thoughts" which we
   "owe to him" lend themselves to laughter. lSI
Becco even suggests that the epitaph Leibniz wrote for van Helmont may have
been ironic. IS2 This is hard to believe in as much as Leibniz sent his epitaph
to both Eric Benzelius, with the specific request that Benzelius pass it on to
the editor ofthe Nouvelles de la Republiques des Lettres for inclusion,IS3 and
Thomas Burnett. IS4
   As for Leibniz's other remarks about van Helmont, admittedly much
depends on how one interprets them. I interpret them in one of two ways.
First, by taking a jocular tone when discussing van Helmont's most radical
theories - for example his belief in universal salvation and rejection of the
orthodox notion of hell as a place of eternal torment - Leibniz could sound
out the opinions of his corespondents on controversial issues without having to reveal his own positions, which, as I will argue, were in some cases
extremely radical precisely because they agreed with those of van Helmont.
Second, if one takes into account the tone of Leibniz's remarks, they seem
to me to convey affection and respect, not ridicule and contempt, for a man
Leibniz genuinely liked and revered. But it will be up to readers to make up
their own minds. ISS For this reason I have included a considerable number
of substantial quotations from Leibniz's letters to make a decision possible.
40       Chapter Three

In my opinion, the essential point to keep in mind when assessing Leibniz's
relationship with van Helmont is that, while he did take van Helmont's views
seriously, he was acutely aware of van Helmont's reputation for eccentricity
and unorthodoxy. As a mediator and conciliator, Leibniz could not afford to
appear too closely associated with any kind of extremism. Hence his tendency to applaud van Helmont's character yet mention his opinions with just
enough distance so that if anyone should object, he could plead disbelief.
Stuart Brown recognizes this aspect of the relationship between the two men.
As he says,
     Van Helmont ... was a cause of scandal to the religiously orthodox and
     Leibniz's diplomatic sensibilities would have made him aware of the dangers of appearing to associate himself with van Helmont in such a way as
     to be tarred with the same brush .... 156
        But, for all the ... somewhat unkind remarks about his friend, it was van
     Helmont who had by far the greater influence on Leibniz. 157
The fact that Leibniz came to van Helmont's defense on occasion also suggests
that he took more than a casual interest in both the man and his opinions. In
response to Vincent Placcius' confession "that I have been able to gain little
or nothing from the kabbalistic ideas of Helmont and Knorr. I do not see any
solid foundation for these matters," Leibniz replies:
     I have praised Francis Mercury van Helmont and Knorr of Sulzbach to you
     not because of their kabbalistic meditations, but for many other good and
     honest (as it seems to me) opinions and notions. I make it a practice that
     wherever I seek and to whatever I tum my attention, I look at what I find
     praiseworthy rather than what I censure. 158
Admittedly, Leibniz has not rushed to the defense of the Kabbalah in this
response, but few people did at the time for perfectly understandable reasons,
whatever their actual view of the Kabbalah might have been. 159 In a letter to
Andre Morell, Leibniz also defends van Helmont, this time against the charge
of being a misanthrope:
  Your letter gives me reason to add something. M. van Helmont returned here
  on his way to Sulzbach, and I hope he will come back soon. He is in no way
  a misanthrope; on the contrary he is a very honest man [honneste homme]
  with very good opinions. But he is extraordinary and not to everyone's
  taste at first. Besides, age has weakened him a bit, because I think he is
  over eighty. Nevertheless he travels in a mail coach without a valet. 160
Years after van Helmont's death Leibniz was still defending him. In his review
of Shaftsbury's Characteristicks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, which
Leibniz wrote in 1711, he pays the following tribute to his old friend:
        Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration             41

  I believe that on page 287 there is a reference to the late Mr. van Helmont,
  the son, who was in the prisons of the Inquisition at Rome and who took
  advantage of that solitude to examine the usage of the organs [of speech]
  in the pronunciation of letters, believing that he had found there how their
  written characters were formed. I knew this same person uncommonly
  well, and I must do him the justice to say that he was not as ignorant in
  questions of morality as one seems to portray him here. It was he who
  was responsible for reprinting the Lycurgus of Octavius Pisani, which
  advised the public on how to shorten legal proceedings. His conduct was
  without reproach, his actions full of charity and unselfishness, and with
  the exception of several fanciful ideas which stayed with him from the
  impressions of his youth like an hereditary sickness, he was an excellent
  man whose conversation was very instructive for those who knew how to
  profit from it. His writings only reveal what was least praiseworthy about
  him. 161

The passages quoted should establish the fact that Leibniz took far more
interest in van Helmont than has generally been realized. As we have seen,
Leibniz tended to distance himself from van Helmont's kabbalistic theories,
while praising him for his character, his concern for the general good, and his
knowledge of practical matters. But this reticence about the Kabbalah must
not be taken as proof of Leibniz's disinterest or disbelief. The entire thrust
of my argument is that the Kabbalah left its mark on Leibniz's thought. To
substantiate this, there is no better place to begin than with Leibniz's monthlong stay in Sulzbach, from December 31, 1687 to February 1, 1688 (Aiton
says Leibniz returned again later in February162).
   Leibniz was obviously impressed by von Rosenroth's tremendous erudition
as well as by his interest in languages, an interest Leibniz shared. In addition to
his study of theology, law, philosophy, philology, and history, von Rosenroth
became a proficient linguist in Hebrew, Aramaic, Syriac, Greek, Arabic,
French, Dutch, English, Spanish, as well as German and Latin. But Leibniz's
admiration for von Rosenroth was based on more than an appreciation of
his keen intellect. They had many mutual interests, interests also shared
by van Helmont. Von Rosenroth was a dedicated natural philosopher and
kept up with the latest scientific developments. He corresponded with Henry
Oldenburg, the Secretary of the Royal Society in London, and was asked by
the Society's President, Lord Brouncker, to contribute observations suitable
for publication in the Philosophical Transactions. 163 Yet, like van Helmont
and Leibniz, von Rosenroth did not confine himself to an ivory tower of
speculation, as many intellectuals of the period did expressly to avoid religious
and political controversy. On the contrary, he entered the political arena with
the intention of improving religious and social conditions. As a result of van
42     Chapter Three

Helmont's friendship with the Prince of Sulzbach, von Rosenroth became a
privy counselor and eventually Chancellor of the territory, advising Christian
August in the same way that Leibniz advised the Electress Sophie. At the same
time, von Rosenroth was a poet and dramatist of considerable stature. 164 This
aspect of his work would have interested Leibniz in as much as Leibniz also
wrote poetry and shared von Rosenroth's interest in turning German into
a viable literary, philosophical, and scientific language. 165 Von Rosenroth's
German translations of scientific, alchemical, and philosophical works are
especially interesting in this regard because of the clarity of his style and
his refusal to introduce foreign words and terminology into German, as was
routinely done by most German authors. Like both van Helmont and Leibniz,
von Rosenroth was steeped in Renaissance Neoplatonism, Hermeticism, and
the natural magic tradition. Under the pseudonyms Rautner and Peganius, he
translated into German J. B. van Helmont'sworks as well as works by G. B.
della Porta, Thomas Browne, and Henry More. In one of these translations
he even included a youthful work by Leibniz (Leibniz only found out about
this later - to his annoyance - but without ever realizing that von Rosenroth
had been the perpetratorI66 ). Von Rosenroth also shared Leibniz's and van
Helmont's distaste for Cartesian philosophy and the mechanical philosophy,
and like them he was a vitalist and a practicing alchemist. In his"translation of
Porta's Natural Magic, von Rosenroth describes searching a Parisian cemetery
for the proper materials for making the philosopher's stone. 167 Von Rosenroth
also acquired a reputation as an adept. Like van Helmont, he was believed
to possess miraculous medicines, and he was reputed to have supernatural
powers which enabled him to predict the hour of his own death and to
return from the grave for a visit to his daughter (Leibniz read the description
of this encounter, which had been sent to the Duchess of Hanover by van
Helmont).168 These unusual characteristics may explain a contemporary's
description of von Rosenroth as "selzam, doch lieblich.,,169
   Von Rosenroth also aroused Leibniz's mathematical interest by showing
him a magical square. Leibniz still remembered this four years after his visit
to Sulzbach. He describes the square in a letter to Loubere (4 February 1692):
  The late Mr. Knorr, who gave us the Zohar of the Jews and the Kabbala
  denudata, and who was perhaps the most knowledgeable man in Europe
  about the most hidden matters of the Jews, showed me a magical square
  from memory, which harkend back to your Indian method, as I remember.
  I looked for the sketch I made of it because I have been too distracted
  by other matters to have thought of it since. I believe that he learned this
  method from some Jews or Arabs. 170
Loubere wrote to Leibniz asking for more information. The following June
Leibniz sent it to him:
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration           43

  I can ... satisfy your request about the magic square. I have finally found
  the method which the late Mr. Knorr von Rosenroth communicated to me.
  I imagine it can be found in some kabbalistic books. 171
The circumstances of the two men's lives also had much in common. Von
Rosenroth shared Leibniz's frustration at living in a kind of intellectual exile.
This is one reason why, like Leibniz, he spent so much time on his correspondence. And like Leibniz, he too felt constantly pressed for time and unable to
travel or devote as much energy as he wished to intellectual matters because
of his public duties. In a letter to Henry More von Rosenroth laments the fact
that he is "compelled to live in a place so remote" and that "official business
and economic affairs prevent [me] from traveling." Because he feels so isolated, he implores More to send him a list of the best recent books dealing
with philosophy and theology. 172
   Von Rosenroth took the pseudonym Rautner from his birthplace, Raudten, a
city in Silesia, from which his family had been forced to flee during the Thirty
Years' War. This catastrophic war had a lasting impact on him, fostering a lifelong commitment to peace and religious unity. His fervent desire for religious
concord motivated him to undertake what he often described as the arduous
task of editing and translating the texts that went into the Kabbala Denudata.
Van Helmont shared his ecumenical vision and helped von Rosenroth collect,
edit, and publish these texts because he also believed that the Kabbalah
provided the basis for implementing it. Following in the footsteps of their
Renaissance predecessors, these two Christian Kabbalists were certain they
could free Christianity from the corruptions accumulated over centuries by
rediscovering the so-called prisca theologia imparted by God orally to Moses
on Mount Sinai. 173 They were convinced that the kabbalistic writings of
the Jews offered a far more authentic source for rediscovering this prisca
theologia than the Hermetica, the Sibylline Prophecies, or the Orphica, for
all these were pagan sources and hence suspect. Von Rosenroth made this
point in defense of his kabbalistic studies - and it should be noted that even
he, a well recognized scholar and linguist, felt the need to defend this interest
in such an esoteric study of Jewish sources (Hans Joachim Schoeps has
described the Baroque period as an age of philosemitism, but he overlooks
the very real antisemitism prevalent at the time 174 ):
   I hoped I would be able to discover in the cabbalistic writings of the
  Jews what remained of the ancient Barbaric-Judaic philosophy.... I had
  no greater wish than that I might be permitted to enjoy the sun itself and
  its brighter light once all the clouds of obstructions and hindrances were
  scattered. I scarcely hoped I would be able to catch sight of this light
  unless I followed in the footsteps of that river and arrived at the spring
  itself, which I believe will be discovered in these very ancient books. 175
44       Chapter Three

In their philosemitism, von Rosenroth and van Helmont attributed the discord
plaguing Christianity to Greek philosophy, and they looked for a remedy in
the Jewish Kabbalah. As von Rosenroth says in the Kabbala Denudata:
     As often as I lamented that detestable discord within the Church - and it
     is possible to show that these evils have arisen chiefly from that begetter
     of dissention, our pagan philosophy - I thought that at some time or other
     a way could be found to bring back the divided Churches into Christian
     accord. 176

Van Helmont and von Rosenroth were convinced that the Kabbalah provided
answers to all the many problematic features of Christianity. For example,
how could ajust and merciful God create men and then damn them to eternity
when, in his omniscience, he was bound to know they would sin? Even
more problematic was the Protestant doctrine of predestination, which in the
eyes of many people made God an unjust tyrannt and the author of sin and
evil. Finally, how could Christianity claim to be a universal religion relevant
to all men when salvation rested on a belief in Christ, who lived during
one short historical period and consequently remained unknown to the vast
majority of the world's population? All these problems could be solved by the
kabbalistic doctrines of tikkun, or restoration, which postulated that human
beings were continually reborn until they finally purged themselves of all sin
and returned to their original state of perfection. Everyone would therefore
have the opportunity at some point to be saved, even if they had lived long
before the birth of Christ and in areas where the Scriptures had not penetrated.
   Besides solving these problematic features of Christian doctrine, van Helmont and von Rosenroth were convinced the Kabbalah had the additional
advantage of offering a single, sure method of Scriptural interpretation which
would not only lead to the reunion of Christians but to the conversion of
pagans, Moslems, and Jews. Such ecumenical visions inspired von Rosenroth to keep toiling away at the Kabbala Denudata in the face of personal
tragedy, persecution from both Christians and Jews, and considerable financial strain. As he writes in the preface to his monumental work:
  From this you may know with how much devotion, indeed, with what
  danger to my own health and life I am motivated - I say nothing about
  the expenses. I did not allow myself to be discouraged when, towards the
  beginning [of my work] two of my teacher's children died (my teacher,
  who was already old and whose name I omit on account of the hatred
  of his relatives and co-religionists, otherwise he ought not to be deprived
  of praise). Soon the same number were lost to me, which my teacher
  interpreted as a punishment for the publication of this doctrine. Neither
  was I deterred by so many warnings of all my family and my friends. I
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration            45
  persevered with one aim alone, that I might be of service to you, so that the
  knowledge of Hebrew matters should no longer be concerned with mere
  ritual, still less with grammar but should reach to the things themselves,
  which should then be compared with the phrases and doctrines of the New
  Covenant to see if by chance by this means it would be possible to facilitate
  the conversion of the Jewish race to the faith of Jesus Christ. 177

This poignant passage reveals the very real obstacles fa.cing anyone who
ventured to study the Kabbalah, and it offers further support for thinking that
Leibniz's hesitant public reaction to kabbalistic ideas may have been a matter
of self preservation rather than a sign of rejection.
   Leibniz, of course, shared von Rosenroth's ardent desire for a truly ecumenical Christianity. He too believed in the existence of a prisca theologia. 178
From 1671, when he obtained his first position with the Elector of Mainz, to
the end of his life Leibniz was concerned with the reconciliation of Catholics
and Protestants as well as with the conversion of Jews and Moslems to
Christianity.179 This was the basis for his writing the Discourse as well as for
his correspondence with Arnauld. Arnauld's criticisms of his philosophy and
categorical rejection of his overtures for reconciliation produced an impasse
in his thought. Is it so surprising, then, that at the very time this impasse
became apparent, 1688, Leibniz should have traveled to Sulzbach and shown
such interest in the Kabbalah?
   Leibniz's interest in kabbalistic doctrine is revealed by the record he kept
of his conversations with von Rosenroth, which I quote below. These notes
are fascinating because they include kabbalistic ideas Leibniz modified and
included in his later writings. Leibniz specifically says that he has "read
over the Kabbala denudata with [von Rosenroth]" and that he noted down
those points he found most memorable. Among these the following should be
especially kept in mind because of the impact they had on Leibniz's mature
philosophy: 1) that God is an indivisible point and creation occurs through
the emanation of light; 2) that there is a hierarchy of "creatures," "souls,"
"intelligences," or "substantial forms" - these words are used interchangeably; 3) that the inferior intelligences have "fallen," become "obscured," and
experience "suffering"; 4) that these fallen souls are enclosed in "husks" from
which they will be slowly "extracted" through repeated "generation"; 5) that
man is the "microcosm"; 6) that after all "souls" are eventually "extracted"
from their "husks" [i.e. perfected or saved], the millennium will begin; 7)
that all souls sinned in Adam and Eve, in other words that all souls were
originally contained in Adam and Eve and therefore shared in original sin.
As I will argue in the last four chapters, these kabbalistic ideas played their
part in shaping Leibniz's concept of monads, his argument for free will, his
theodicy, and his theory of causation as volition. Because of the significance
46     Chapter Three

of this document and the relative difficulty of obtaining it, I quote it in full,
highlighting the most relevant sections:

  M. Rosenroth has published different things without his name, such as the
  Kabbala denudata, part one and two. The first contains a procedure for
  dyeing fabric taken from some Jews and which should be excellent. The
   second part has several extracts from the Zohar, the Zohar published in
  Hebrew, with ancient glosses. Guillaume Prostel [Postel] began a translation of the Zohar from what someone sent him from Oxford, but he did not
  understand it sufficiently. He was deprived of the help we now have. At
  this moment the Jews are publishing a harmony of the Gospels. Luther's
  translation is printed in German characters. The Gospels of Matthew, Mark,
  Luke, and John are designated by the letters a, b, c, d. Whatever is found
  in one of them is marked by a single letter; whatever is found in several is
  marked by several letters. He has some fine oriental books, which are listed
  at the end of the Kabbala denudata. He has translated from English certain
  questions concerning the preexistence of souls, which contains opinions he
  does not accept. He is attending to the publication in German of the works
  of Helmont with certain commentaries. The New Helicon is a collection
  of sacred songs printed, I believe, at Frankfurt and which one can find at
  Nuremberg at Felsekern.
      I have read over the Kabbala denudata with him, from which I have
  taken whatfollows:
      The infinite being consists in an indivisible point and the emanated light,
  or the sphere of activity, sends forth its light at its pleasure.
      The first born of the creatures, the Messiah, in as much as he is a
  creature, is called Adam Kadmon. He receives the first rays of light and
  sends them to the other creatures.
     The second class is Adam, or the body of souls.
     The third class is that of the intelligences superior to souls.
     The fourth is the microprosopon or the passions.
     The fifth class is that of the inferior intelligences which have fallen and
  are called Adam Belial.
     The last class is that of the kingdom or the sephirs [the sefiroth], in
  which the spirits or substantial forms are contained. Seized with disgust
  for the supreme light and obscured by their fall, the six classes contained
  in Adam Belial, experience a certain suffering as inferior creatures. It is
  to this that St. Paul refers when he speaks of the suffering of the creatures.
  This corruption reaches all the way to the superior classes. But the Messiah
  descended and put the superior classes in the place of the fallen ones. From
  the fallen angels he made the husks, that is the obscured [darkened] lights.
  These are those who afterwards lead the souls in captivity, and it is thus
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration           47

  that the souls are enclosed in the husks from which they will be extracted
  little by little by generation, which supposes ... they have no choice. The
  souls are divided into the soul of the head, the neck, etc. The body is eight
  times the length of the head, and this has a cabbalistic meaning: it signifies
  the eighth millennium.
      Man, who is at the same time the summation and the consummation of
  the creation is a little world or microcosm. When the husks are consumed,
  that is to say, when all the souls are extracted, it will be the end. All souls
  sinned in Adam and Eve, from whom came original sin. The Messiah took
  a body. One must therefore distinguish three things in him: his divinity, his
  rank, the first born of the creatures, and finally that which was born in time
  and of a virgin. There are different interpretations of the divine persons.
  The son corresponds to the class of the Messiah and the Holy Spirit to that
  of the souls. St. Paul appeared to make a distinction between God and the
  father of our Savior Jesus Christ. He appoints the coming of the Messiah
  and his reign on earth about 1832. 180
   While he was still in Sulzbach, Leibniz wrote to Landgraf Ernst von
Hessen-Rheinfels, expressing his admiration for von Rosenroth and his Kabbalistic studies. Even in this totally laudatory letter, one can detect some
defensiveness on Leibniz's part and his need to justify his interest in the
Kabbalah by emphasizing its potential for converting the Jews. Once again,
I would suggest this indicates how difficult it was to support potentially
controversial religious views at this time:
  I find again a very capable man at Sulzbach named M. Knorr von Rosenroth,
  who is the Chancellor. He spends what time his duties allow in investigating nature by way of chemistry and in bringing to light the kabbalistic
  antiquities of the ancient Jews. He has found some very excellent things
  concerning the Messiah which the modern Jews do not know about or try
  to suppress or turn away from their true meaning. Their chief book on the
  Cabala is called the Zohar, and it is totally different from the Talmud. Few
  Christians have seen it or can understand it. Many still make fun of such
  undertakings, but I think otherwise. I value at all times what is good and
  am well pleased with that difference in dispositions and intentions which
  cause nothing to be neglected and the honor of God and the good of men
  to be advanced in a number of ways.181
In another letter written to Gerhardt Molanus (1633-1722) a month after his
departure from Sulzbach, Leibniz returns to the subject of von Rosenroth
and the Kabbalah. Once again he emphasizes von Rosenroth's knowledge of
chemistry and the Kabbalah, but in this letter he mentions his skill as a poet
as well:
48       Chapter Three

      ... In Sulzbach I spoke to the Chancellor, Mr. Knorr, a man of great
     erudition. Among German poets he has few equals, but that is the least of
     the things he should be praised for. As for chemistry and mathematics I
     will say nothing. There is scarcely anyone today among Christians more
     versed in the hidden knowledge of the Jews. He has taken trouble to
     publish many excerpts from the book the Zohar, by means of which he
     has established many Christian truths. For it appears that the traditions of
     the ancients give proof of the existence of Christ. He has many kabbalistic
     books of the Jews brought from the East, which are detested in Europe
     but serve as commentaries on the Zohar. It appears that the Cabala of the
     Jews is a certain kind of more lofty metaphysic, which, divested of its
     covering of words, reveals certain very splendid matters, although some
     less valuable notions l,U"e interspersed. They observe magnificent things
     about the Messiah as being beyond the measure of a human being, nor do
     they think of him as a mere boy, like the common people of their nation. In
     this way the history of Christ, from his conception up to the dispute in the
     Temple, will be beautifully embellished with many passages taken from
     the Kabbalists. 182
The following September Leibniz was still thinking about von Rosenroth and
the Kabbalah. Writing to Hiob Ludolph (1624-1704), the German statesman
and philologist who wrote a history of the Ethiopian language, he again praises
von Rosenroth, his knowledge of the Kabbalah, and the Kabbalah's potential
usefulness in converting the Jews. He describes von Rosenroth as a polyglot
and tells Ludolph that he wants to establish a correspondence between them.
This letter makes it clear that Leibniz considered von Rosenroth a serious and
significant scholar, which could not have been the case if he had dismissed
the Kabbalah as either unimportant or worthless.
  In Sulzbach I had many conversations with the most impressive Knorr,
  the Chancellor, a great Hebreophile, who is not unknown to you. He is
  versed beyond most Christians in the most profound part of the language
  of the Jews which they call Kabbala. He has bought many important
  manuscripts, some found in the East, others elsewhere, from which he digs
  out the secrets of their teachings, which are for the most part metaphysical
  and examples of which appear in the Kabbala denudata and elsewhere. He
  showed me an almost completed work, the title of which is Messias puer, in
  which the history of Christ from the annunciation to his baptism, which is
  handed down by the Evangelists and others, is then wonderfully illustrated
  by passages from the ancient Cabbalists. He received with pleasure the
  continuation of your Ethiopian [history], which he had hoped for, as well
  as those things concerning the letter of the Samaritans, which I told you
  about, and your method for the comparing of different alphabets. For he is a
       Leibniz and van Belmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration            49

  polyglot, and I would therefore like to establish a correspondence between
  you. I83

The letters and texts quoted up to this point should give the reader the sense
that Leibniz took far more interest in van Helmont, von Rosenroth, and the
Kabbalah than has generally been realized. But it is in his correspondence
with the Electress Sophie and the various memoranda he wrote for her as well
as for her daughter, Sophie Charlotte, the Electress of Brandenburg, and her
niece, Elizabeth Charlotte, the Duchess of Orleans, that the full measure of
Leibniz's interest in van Helmont's kabbalistic ideas becomes apparent. Van
Helmont was a figure of great interest to these three women. He himself was
deeply attached to both Sophie and her daughter, visiting them in Hanover
and Berlin. In one letter to the elder Sophie, he says he regrets the fact that
he cannot divide himself in two so that he "could wander in the garden with
my two gracious Sophies while the weather is still so nice.,,184 The affection
he felt for them was returned, as one can see from a letter Leibniz wrote
to van Helmont in March, 1696. Leibniz had been sent a letter addressed
to van Helmont by Knorr von Rosenroth's son, who clearly thought Leibniz
would know where van Helmont was. Leibniz did and sent the letter on to
van Helmont in Berlin with the following letter of his own:

  ... The letter which I send to you, Monsieur, is from Monsieur Knorr von
  Rosenroth, the son of the late Chancellor of Sulzbach, who was your worthy
  friend as well as mine. The young Mr. von Rosenroth is a gentleman at the
  court of Wolfenbiittel, as I see from the letter he wrote to me thinking that
  you were still in Hanover. He informs me by order of His Highness, Duke
  Anton Ulric, that his Electoral Highness wishes to see and speak with you.
  I remember telling you when you were here, Monsieur, although on my
  own, that you would give singular pleasure to that Prince if you visited
  him. And I see that my guess was not amiss. However, since your trip to
  Berlin in such good company did not allow you to go to Wolfenbiittel this
  time, I hope that you will go there when you return here. I hope you will
  do this in good health as soon as it is convenient and that we can enjoy
  your conversation for years on end. Madame, the Electress of Brunswick,
  could not receive a greater pleasure since the memory even of the little
  time you were here pleases her. It is true that she is always willing to share
  the pleasure with Madame the Electress of Brandenburg, who has an equal
  taste for excellent people and ideas.
      As for the rest, I recall our conversations and I am glad to learn that you
  have resolved to communicate before long to the world some of your fine
  and important ideas. I8S
50       Chapter Three

  The younger von Rosenroth's letter to Leibniz, which initiated Leibniz' to
van Helmont, is further evidence that van Helmont was not the intellectual
non-entity he has been made out to be:

     Monsieur,
     I take the liberty of sending you the enclosed for Monsieur Helmont, not
     knowing how else to make sure he receives it. I suspect that you do not
     know a man whose name and virtues are better known in the world. He
     is presently in Hanover and his Serene Highness the Duke, my master, is
     interested in meeting a man whose reputation speaks so well. If you could
     persuade him to come here, you would oblige His Highness appreciably.
     As for me, I would be no less obliged to you. Since he always honored my
     late father with his affection and they were the most intimate friends and
     since I have had the honor of his acquaintance for a long time, I hope I can
     find favor in his eyes.
        As for the rest, I am, Monsieur,
                                        Your very humble and obedient servant,
                                                      H. Knorr de Rosenroth 186

Van Helmont received the two letters and wrote back to the Electress, telling
her how much he looked forward to seeing her again:
     I cannot forget either your illustrious Grace nor the company at Hanover.
     So, if my health and affairs allow me, it is my intention to return from
     Sulzbach to Hanover so that way I can see also see my dear Electress.
     Then the harmony will be perfect. I hope to kiss the hand of Herzog Anton
     Ulrich, following the request in the letters of Herr Leibniz and Herr Knor
     de Rosenroot. I remain as I always have been, wishing that the Lord's
     blessing be with your illustrious Grace. H. 187
Van Helmont's ease and familiarity with the Electress is revealed in the
following letter as well. Here he mentions the pleasure he had seeing Sophie's
daughter in Berlin and he describes how much his cousin, with whom he was
staying, would benefit from conversations with the Electress. He says that he
has arranged for his cousin to send the Electress a description of a strange
dream had by Knorr von Rosenroth's daughter, both for her own and the
Duchess of Orleans' amusement. Van Helmont would often write to the
Electress about strange or amusing things, which she could then pass on to
her niece, the Duchess. He ends the letter by offering his services:
     After my departure from Hanover to Amsterdam to find the illustrious
     Electress of Brandenburg, I eventually found her in Bielefeld, where I left
     her with sadness, especially because she would have taken me back to
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration           51

  Hanover. My departure affected me very much, especially seeing that I
  could not divide myself in two so that I could walk in the garden with my
  two gracious Sophies while the weather is still fine there.
     Since I arrived here I have wished many times that I was in your presence
  with my cousin to hear her speak with intelligent people and priests about
  the dispute in religion. She has read the Bible with diligence. She is good
  hearted, wants to do good, and is free from vain fantasies, so that in a
  subtle way she can make people admit that Scripture is given to men and
  has to make sense for different people in different ways. Like music she
  can end disputes in harmony and love.
     My cousin told me this along with other things that she has written in
  French at my request, judging that they could be copied and sent to France
  for Madam, along with the dream of the daughter of von Rosenroth, who
  translated the poems of Boethius out of Latin and into German.
     I think I will stay here for several days in order to have my writings
  copied with some changes before I think of traveling back to Amsterdam.
  If there is any service I can do for your illustrious Grace here or there,
  letters can be addressed to me at the house of Madam the Baroness of
  Merode, called Mutzfelt, in Emmerich in the vicinity of Ter Borg. 188
   Van Helmont did perform various services for the Electress, both practical ones, such as sending medicines and even shoe patterns for Sophie
Charlotte,189 and diplomatic ones. He had provided such services for the
various members of the Palatine family (as well as others) for years. For
example, he mediated between Sophie's brothers, the Elector Karl Ludwig
and Rupert, during their bitter property dispute, and he helped Sophie's sister,
Elizabeth, famous for her correspondence with Descartes, obtain a pension
from the English government as the granddaughter of James I. Van Helmont
received his patent of nobility from Emperor Leopold in 1658 in recognition
for such good works. 190
   The following December the Electress received an intriguing letter from a
certain Abbe de Lessing, who was actually writing on behalf of a third party, a
Princess de Chimayo The letter reveals the extent of van Helmont's reputation
as an adept and doctor with miraculous medicines. I quote the letter in full
because it provides such a vivid picture ofthe magical, even demonic, powers
associated with anyone thought to have exceptional healing skills:
  Having found myself lately, Madam, in Brussels in a group among whom
  was the Princess de Chimay of the Bossu family, someone began talking
  about Sr. de Helmont, why I don't know. She led me apart and began to
  give me - I do not know if it was a eulogy or a critique of the life of that
  man. The conclusion is that she told me in detail what she knew of this
  man, who has marvelous secrets in medicine and other things. But she told
52       Chapter Three

     me that this made him a wanderer for fear that someone would steal his
     secrets. There was one to which the Princess told me he gave different
     names, but which all those who have seen its miraculous effects baptize
     Diaphoretic Mercury, which is a skin-colored powder.
        As for me, Madam, I am a man of the world, perhaps, who believes
     very little in these sorts of secrets. Besides, it could easily be that I write
     nothing to your illustrious Electress which you wouldn't know without
     this. But the Princess de Chimay asked me so insistently to write to you
     and to assure you that this powder is a treasure which has no price, the
     prodigious effects of which she has seen, and to implore you not to lose
     the chance to have the secret from Sr. de Helmont, or a least the powder,
     that I could not refuse this good lady's request to take this liberty ... 191
Shortly after the Electress received Abbe de Lessing's letter, Leibniz wrote
to van Helmont on her instructions. Although much more of a skeptic than
the Princess of Chimay, Leibniz did not dismiss the possibility that such a
medicine might exist:
  You see, Monsieur, from what I just told you about the letter which Madam
  the Electress received from Brussels, that Madam the Princess of Chimay
  infinitely esteems your secret. Madam the Electress directed me to write
  to you about what is said about this, and you tell us what you judge
  appropriate and what you would have us say. It is not always necessary to
  disabuse people. On the contrary, the good opinion that they have about
  a remedy augments its effect. Besides, I readily believe that you have
  singular things both in medicine and in other matters which merit esteem.
  Madam, the Princess of Chimay, wishes that one might have at least some
  of the powder, even without the secret. She doesn't ask so much for-herself
  but she advises us not to lose the opportunity to obtain secrets and remedies
  of importance. I admire the curiosity of the lady, and I prefer people of
  this character to those who are both ignorant and suspicious of things they
  know nothing about. 192
Upon receiving Leibniz's letter, van Helmont wrote to the Electress, protesting
that because he was not a doctor he could not send the medicine. But he says
that he will give the recipe to a doctor, who can presumably then give it to
her:
  The reason that I write this letter to you is because I received a letter
  myself from Mr. Leibnitz. He wrote that the Princess of Simay had written
  him about a medicine that I was supposed to send. I've already told the
  person whom it was for that this was impossible for me to do, not being a
  doctor. I've let him know that via his Excellency, Mr. Diest, your husband's
  ambassador in Brussels, who has been asking me for a year now to impart
       Leibniz and van Belmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration          53

  the medicine to the Pripce of Vaudemont. But now, working together with
  my cousin from Merode, he has come up with the idea of sending over an
  intelligent doctor to whom I should give the recipe, which I agreed to do.
The rest of the letter is interesting because it once again shows how close van
Helmont's friendship was with the Electress. He informs her that his cousin
has given birth to a daughter, who has been named Sophie, after the two
Electresses. He.describes the painful cramps he has in his hands and a recent
illness, from which he has recovered. He then asks the Electress to intervene
in a family property dispute. 193
    In addition to these personal ties of friendship and mutual assistance, the
Electress was interested in van Helmont's views as a philosopher. Although
she freely admitted that she could not follow everything van Helmont said and was not sure he could himself _194 she thought seriously about his ideas,
asking Leibniz for clarification when necessary. In providing this service,
Leibniz was forced to formulate his own ideas on these matters more clearly.
In this sense van Helmont was both a foil and a catalyst for Leibniz in the
development of his own philosophy. Several entries in the journal Leibniz
kept during August and September of 1696 makes this aspect of van Helmont's influence clear:

  August 3, 1696

  The illustrious Electress gave me a letter to read from Madame the Duchess
  of Orleans in which, given the occasion by Herr Helmont's thoughts about
  the soul, she reasons and supposes that we accept the soul's immortality
  only from faith, but to natural reason it would seem that everything returns
  to elements in order to be reborn. Therefore, from the rules of justice one
  cannot judge accurately about the doings of God, since such rules are for
  men and do not constrain the highest Being. I should give my thoughts on
  this. The occasion for this letter came from Herr Helmont's speculations,
  which the Electress sent to Madame, so that, although she does not agree
  with him, yet she praises and wishes for his tranquillity.

  August 4

  I have put down some brief thoughts for the Electress about the letter
  from Madame.

  August 6

  With the Electress in her study in Herrenhausen. I outlined what she could
54      Chapter Three

     answer to Madame about the soul and van Helmont. I kept a copy.195

Clearly, van Helmont's ideas stimulated Leibniz to develop his own.
   A letter written by Leibniz to Sophie two years earlier, on September 3,
1694, reveals van Helmont in the same provocative role. I quote this letter
in full because it shows how carefully Leibniz read van Helmont's books
and illustrates the kind of important issues van Helmont's work raised in
his mind. As one will see, there were many points of agreement between
Leibniz and van Helmont. They both reject the corpuscular philosophy of the
Cartesians and Gassendists for a vitalist philosophy that endows matter with
force and activity; they both believe that animals have souls, again rejecting
Cartesian dualism; they are equally critical of Quietists and reject the idea of a
universal spirit; and they both agree that there is an infinity of created things.
The major areas of disagreement between the two men lie in the doctrine of the
transmigration of souls, which Leibniz rejected in favor of the idea that souls
are continually transformed - the two ideas are really not that different as I
will suggest - and van Helmont's denial of the eternity of hell, which Leibniz
says he does not accept, although, as I will show, he eventually does. The
reference to Peter Serrarius in this letter is interesting in this connection. He
was a Dutch Chiliast who had accepted Sabbatai Sevi's claim to be the Jewish
Messiah. He belonged to a circle of philosemitic millenarians, with whom van
Helmont was in contact. 196 In all probability, Leibniz learned about Serrarius
and his radical views from van Helmont. An especially important section of
this letter deals with van Helmont's conviction that all creatures will arrive
at greater perfection. Leibniz incorporates this idea in his later theodicy. This
marked an important evolution in his thought and can be directly attributed
to van Helmont (this will be more fully discussed in chapter six). This long
and detailed letter indicates that Leibniz was thoroughly conversant with van
Helmont's and von Rosenroth's kabbalistic ideas. He admits that he finds some
of these "incontestable," even though he describes them as "extraordinary and
perhaps allegorical." As for the rest, he is willing to suspend judgment until
van Helmont has a chance to explain them more fully. This point should
be stressed: Leibniz does not dismiss these ideas out of hand; he asks for
more evidence to support them. Once again I have highlighted those phrases
and sentences that I believe stimulated the development of Leibniz's own
philosophy.
  I have read with pleasure and profit the two books that M. van Helmont sent
  to Your Electoral Highness. He could not have better addressed the sublime
  thoughts that are found there. I wished that there had been joined there the
  third entitled The Spirit of Diseases cited in the book of Mr. Buchius about
  God. I found there many things that come back to me often enough; but
    Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration            55

there are also others that I cannot follow without seeing sufficient proofs.
Many people only notice in books what they believe and can remember;
but I, on the contrary, give all my attention to what appears to me to be the
most solid.
   I am very glad that Mr. van Helmont has found in Mr. Buchius a man
who explains his opinions in an intelligible manner. I have often wished
that the late Mr. Knorr from Sulzbach, who was such a capable man, had
wished, or could have taken the trouble, the way he began to do in his
book on the kabbalistic science of the Jews. But I hope even more that
someone conserves for posterity the quantity of fine discoveries that Mr.
van Helmont has made in many different arts and sciences.
   As for the two books, I see that one does not include the name of its
author. That is why I wonder if Mr. van Helmont wants to claim it. It is true
that the eternity of punishments that is denied there does not conform to the
ancient theology of pagans and that it was not completely received among
the Jews, or even among Christians. The great Origen did not believe it.
It seems that St. Gregory of Nyssa took the side of the Platonists, who
believed that all God's punishments were only medicines with the object
of improvement. St. Jerome and several other fathers were not far from
believing that all Christians would be finally saved, after having passed
through the fire. Thus hell became for them a purgatory. In the past century a
learned man Celsius Secundus Curio l97 wrote a book about the magnitude
of the celestial kingdom in which he tried to prove that the number of
saved is incomparably greater than the damned, notwithstanding what is
said about the narrow path. In our age Peter Serrarius from Amsterdam
already wished to announce to men that new, alleged Gospel, or that good
news concerning the extinction of hell. It is said that St. Louis (if I am
not mistaken) met a young girl carrying a lighted torch in one hand and a
pitcher filled with water in the other. The king asked her what this meant.
She replied: to bum paradise and to extinguish hell so that men might
serve God henceforth without servile fear or mercenary interest. That's
well and good for the fear of hell, but for paradise, that's another matter.
Since that consists in a vision of God, how can one love God with all
one's heart without hoping to see him as much as possible? It is said that
when the Swiss were deliberating about whether it was necessary to keep
purgatory, one member of the company got up and proposed that since they
were there, that they cashier the devils and the whole of hell. But to speak
seriously, it is my opinion that punishment can only be eternal because
of the eternity of sins. Those who will always sin will always be punished
with justice.
56     Chapter Three

    But I pass to the other book, the subject of which is more extensive since
it contains the principles of the theology of Mr. van Helmont put in order
by Mr. Buchius. I was delighted to see that the preface took up those things
that separate theology from philosophy. That sufficiently justifies Mr. van
Helmont against those who accuse him of enthusiasm because Enthusiasts
have this in common with Libertines, they both say things against reason.
    I also share the opinion of Mr. van Helmont when he reproves the
Gassendists and Cartesians who attach themselves solely to a corpuscular
philosophy, which explains every natural thing by means of matter or
extension. And I myself have shown that it is still necessary to bring
in the principle of force, in which consists, so to speak, the connection
between spiritual and corporeal things. Because I maintain that the laws
of nature and the principles ofphysics can only be explained by employing
metaphysical principles, which one needs to fully understand what force
is.
    I also agree-that all substances always remain and do not perish, which
I hold true not dhly in regard to human souls but also in regard to those
of other animals. I have disputed strongly about this in letters to the
celebrated Mr. Arnauld. It is not that I believe in the transmigration of
souls; but I believe in the transformation of the same animal, who is at one
time large and at a another small and assumes diverse forms, as we see in
the case of silkworms when they become butterflies. This conforms more
to the order of things than transmigration. There is then the appearance
that there is strictly neither generation nor death but that the animal is
only enveloped [eveloppeJ or developed, remaining always united to an
organic body, although this body can become incomparably more subtle
than the objects of our senses. This is what the ancient author of a book
attributed to Hippocrates has already said. And also the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews says that visible things are produced from invisible
things. However, I do not wish to extend this doctrine to man nor to the
human soul, being persuaded that because the soul contains the image of
God within itself, it is governed by special laws, the details of which can
only be learned by revelation. And since it appears that Scripture did not
wish to explain this matter as much as we might wish, I doubt than we can
hope to find in this life as much detail concerning the next life as Mr. van
Helmont seems to give us.
    I am strongly of his opinion when he refutes those who believe that our
soul loses itself in the universal spirit. It seems that this is the opinion of
several Mystics and Quietists. But it is a chimera that has no sense; besides
which it is contrary to immortality.
        Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration             57

       When he [Helmont] composes everything of fire and water and takes
   these for spiritual principles, I believe that he understands these allegorically, and that he wished to signify by this an active and a passive principle.
   Most of all I approve of his opinion about the infinity of things, and I have
   already said in the Journal des Savants that each part having .parts to infinity, there is no little portion of matter that does not contain an actual infinity
   of creatures (and apparently living creatures). It is in this way that nature
   bears the character of her Creator. And it is reasonable enough to believe
   that each one of these creatures, however little it is, will have its time to
   arrive at a greater perfection. He speaks further of the envelopment of
   all things in the first man; of the individual humanity of Adam united to
   the Messiah; as well as of our continual dependence on Adam; and of his
   formation from the blood of the earth or from the terrestrial life; likewise
   that Adam and Eve were each one male and female and consequently four
   in all, for which reason the Messiah came at the end of four thousand years
   in the fullness of time; how men will all be reunited in Adam when at the
   end of the century, each will come to his perfection and will have also
   spiritualized and perfected with himself the corporeal creatures attached
   to him; finally concerning the revolutions of the worlds to come. As for all
   that and quantities of other extraordinary and perhaps allegorical thoughts
   that Mr. van Helmont yields to us, I excuse myself from going into them.
   I believe that a part of these tenets are incontestable. But before judging
   them, we must wait for much greater enlightenment from him, assuring
   him of our docility in all that is neither against reason, Scripture, nor
   the everlasting tradition of the Catholic Church. I am content to know in
   general that because of the wisdom and immense goodness of the author
   of things, everything is so well ordered and will go so well, even after this
   life, for those who love God. We would be overjoyed to know more. And I
   do not doubt that he judges your Electoral Highness as worthy as anyone
   in this universe to be instructed in these mysteries. I am with devotion ... 198

   The second paragraph of this letter, in which Leibniz says how glad he is
that van Helmont has found an expositor of his thoughts in Buchius, is taken
by Anne Becco as an example of Leibniz's sarcasm. I must admit that I fail
to see the sarcasm, but I leave it up to the reader.
   Leibniz clearly thought van Helmont had important things to say. During
van Helmont's visit to Hanover in August, 1696 Leibniz spent a great deal of
time with him, discussing both practical and philosophical matters, just as he
had the previous March in those meetings in the Electress' study. Leibniz's
journal entries, which only cover the period between August 3 and September
26, when the journal unfortunately ends, show how frequently he was in van
Helmont's company. These entries deserve to be quoted in full because they
58       Chapter Three

present such a vivid picture of both men's enormous curiosity and their wide
range of interests - from the making of wheelbarrows and shoes with springs
to biblical chronology:
     August 7

     I spoke at length with Herr von Helmont this evening about transporting earth and about a good wheelbarrow. Through the motion of a man
     with the barrow much time and energy is wasted. It would be preferable
     that a man move without so much of his own motion. About beating
     gold, and roasting and cooking with ironware. About how to straighten
     those who grow crooked, which he wrote about in the tract concerning the
     Microcosm and the Macrocosm, which was not completely translated into
     German under the title Paradoxa. About printing with feet, spinning with
     two hands. About flax combs.

     August 8

     I told Herr Helmont about my idea about fast get-aways on shoes with
     springs and about the carriage that always runs on a flat surface. He thought
     copper and mercury could be made.

     August 9

     Herr Helmont spent the afternoon with me. He spoke a great deal about
     his speculations. Among them are some good ones. I remonstrated with
     him about his Seder Olam, that sacred chronology is generally uncertain
     because the seventy translators and the Samaritan codex differs from the
     Hebrew text used today and for more than one hundred years. He thought
     he could justify it by finding a loophole in the 7 times of Cain and 77 times
     of Lamech, from which the year of the Flood could be derived. 199

    As this entry shows, Leibniz was critical of the Seder Olam; he had actually
written several critiques of it, probably in 1693 or 1694. 200 Leibniz realized
that van Helmont was not the author of the book, although it did contain
many of his kabbalistic ideas. This is one of the reasons why, when speaking
of van Helmont, Leibniz distinguishes between the man and his writings.
Van Helmont had even told him that his books only partially represented
what he really thought, and Leibniz seemed quite willing to believe him.
It is important to look at these critiques carefully - particularly the second
one which is longer and more detailed - because Leibniz's remarks offer yet
another example of the way in which van Helmont's ideas acted as a catalyst
        Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration             59

in the formation of his own. Leibniz's basic criticism is precisely the one
mentioned in his journal entry, that too many uncertain things are included in
the book. Leibniz is also careful to distance himself from the Kabbalah, but,
as I have argued, this was a necessary and prudent thing to do at the time:
   I read this book a while ago, and I find in it some good thoughts but mixed
   in with a quantity of fancies which are not supported either by reason or
   by sacred Scripture. The opinions and expression of these ancient Hebrew
   Cabalists cannot be taken as solid proof, although some people do ,imagine
   that they represent the traditions of Moses and the ancient sages since in
   effect cabala signifies tradition. 201
But having begun with this caveat, Leibniz continues by describing kabbalistic
ideas which, if interpreted slightly differently, would make good sense. For
example, as he says of the "shocking" kabbalistic notion that God acts by
necessity - an idea that was bound to resonate in his mind - one can give it a
"good meaning." Since, as I argue at a later point, van Helmont's kabbalistic
theories offered an escape from determinism, the reference to the issue here
is significant. However, at this time Leibniz basically repeats what he has
already said to Arnauld and therefore is nowhere near his final position on
this issue.
   The author begins speaking in a way that is somewhat shocking, because he
   says that God is a necessary agent. However, I think that one can give this
   a good meaning, and that is what charity demands, since fundamentally
   God is always determined to make the best and most perfect, and that is
   not contrary to freedom since true freedom consists in the most perfect use
   of one's abilities. 202
In his second series of remarks he makes the similar point that while the
author's speculations "are not completely according to the rigor of true philosophy," they can be given a good sense. This is another example of the way
in which Leibniz "rationalizes" the mythology of the Kabbalah.
   I quote the second critique in full because it provides further proof of how
closely Leibniz read van Helmont's books (or those written for him) and how
detailed his knowledge of kabbalistic thought was. It also gives an indication
of the important issues brought to mind by his analysis of kabbalistic texts.
At the time Leibniz wrote this analysis, he was still a dualist, positing a world
of matter distinct from that of spirit, and he still differentiated between spirits
with minds and those without. He was therefore a long way from his mature
monadology. And while he believed that souls can become better or worse,
he had not yet embraced the idea that the entire world will eventually become
perfect. But there are intimations in this text of ideas that will become more
pronounced, such as the basic similarity of all souls and of their difference
60     Chapter Three

consisting in the clarity of their perceptions. In this regard, it is interesting that
Leibniz mentions the author's belief that fallen souls have been overwhelmed
by a kind of "stupidity" or "death." It is this kind of my tho-poetic phrasing
that Leibniz "rationalized" in developing his concept of monads. There is
the further interesting idea that Leibniz took up at length when he wrote van
Helmont's last book, namely that creation begins with divine thoughts and
occurs through their articulation, or as he says, "projection." I will come back
to this in chapter seven. I have again emphasized those passages that are
important for the purposes of my argument:

  The opinion of the ancient cabalists appears to have been that the Messiah,
   following his humanity, or in as much as he is a creature, was always the
   friend of the creatures. This is what the late Monsieur Knorr Rosenroth
   showed in his Cabala denudata. This author sometime follows these same
   principles. They are good enough thoughts, but without assured proof.
      The author speaks strangely enough when he says on page 28 that all
   created spirits are corporeal. He should have said with more justice that all
   created spirits are embodied [incorporeJ. That was also the opinion of the
   ancient Platonic philosophers, and most of the Church Fathers believed
   that even the angels had subtle bodies. Following that opinion, souls will
   never be separatedfrom all body, only gross bodies. If this is the opinion
  of the author, it is in no way blameworthy.
      It appears also probable enough that there is no corporeal substance in
  nature that is not endowed with some kind of life, soul, or perception, or
  at least with some entelechy or force of acting, which is the lowest degree
  ofform, and if it does not have the entire nature of the soul, at least it has
  something similar that corresponds to perception and appetite.
      If the author had been content with such well understood generalities,
  one would have been satisfied with him, but he moves on to details that
  cannot be known either by reason or revelation. However, he gives free rein
  to his imagination and produces ideas that are amusing enough. He posits
  a world of creation from which the double world of formation comes, a
  superior world for the souls which have remained in the purity of creation,
  whose place is in paradise, and an inferior world for those which have fallen
  as a result of sin and which remain outside of paradise in harmful places.
  Finally, from the inferior world of formation comes our world, which he
  calls the world of faction, where a stupidity or kind of death overcomes
  the souls, so that they act mechanically rather than from a vital principle.
  This should however only be understood comparatively, because there is
  life and corporeity everywhere. He holds that this visible world was not
  created but results from pre-existing acts; that the souls of this world were
  not created; that our bodies with its life, which is called nephesh, do not
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration            61

belong properly in the world of faction; that our spirit, which the Hebrews
call ruah, which is intermediate between the body and the soul, comes from
the world of formation; that neshama, or the soul, alone remains with us
from the world of creation; and finally that the most gross [of these souls]
is the vehicle for the others, thus nephesh for ruah, ruah for neshama, and
that, on the other hand, the most subtle penetrates and illuminates the other
by its rays.
    These thoughts are not entirely exact according to the rigor of true
philosophy, because in truth there is only one world that God continually
creates, and this world is animated everywhere and extends everywhere.
But one can think of it in terms of two kingdoms, one of spirits, which
God governs as a prince, as a person governs other people, and one of
bodies, which he governs like an architect or a mechanic, the way a skillful
master takes care of his machines. These kingdoms penetrate each other
and respond to each in the most profound sense, without one worrying
about the laws of the other, but each one carrying out what is in the ideal
world of the divine word. It is however true that there is some difference
between spirits or intelligences and between souls and that one could
perhaps join to them souls or entelechies inferior to them. But all that only
makes up one world which continues and contains all these different entities
endowed with organized bodies according to their abilities. Whether all
these entelechies are of one kind, as our author supposes, with the result
that the lowest could arrive at the condition of the most noble, is not yet
decided. The difference between visible and invisible bodies corresponds
to our way of thinking but does not in any way mean there is a change
of kind. Thus if ruah is nothing else but a subtle body, one should not
distinguish it from other bodies, except as specks of dust which flit about
in the rays of the sun are distinguishedfrom pebbles.
    Following the cabalists, the author calls the world of creation briah, that
of formation jezhirah, and that of faction asiah, words that are found in
Isaiah, chapter 43. He goes even higher and conceives of a world which
the Hebrews call azilah, which signifies that which is closest to God, or
to the best and supreme Being. But this world only belongs to a Being
who is intermediate between God and his creatures, that is the Messiah.
Later the author says (question 24 on the Apocalypse), that, besides psyche
or nephesh, drawn from the world of asiah, and ruah from jezirah, and
neshama from briah, there is a fourth life named chaja, which comes
from the world of asiah, and which consequently must be the intermediate
place for the spirit of Jesus Christ. Thus the world of azilath is that of
the Messiah, that of briah of the souls, that of jezirah of the unfallen
angels, and that of asiah of men clothed in visible bodies. It is true that
62   Chapter Three

  the Hebrews counted twelve further emanations in the world of asiah, but
  their difference is only modal. This world lasts forever, but there is an
  infinity of briatic worlds, or worlds that God creates from time to time,
  which continually bring forth new jeziratic and aziratic worlds. This is
  why Salomon said, "that one could not fathom the works of God." If by
  the world of asiah the author understands the intelligible world which is
  in God's thoughts, one could allow it, but it must not be said that it holds
 a middle position between God and the creatures, since it belongs to God
  himself. As for the other world, I have already said what one should think
 about them. One should also further distinguish two spheres, or, if you
 wish, two intelligible worlds in God, namely that of simple ideas, which is
 the world of the divine understanding and that of the decrees, that is to say,
 of the ideas decided upon and projected, which is the world of the divine
 will. This world is in the universe of nature, composed of two kingdoms
 which are that of spirit, the laws of which are moral and tend to the best,
 and that of bodies, the laws of which are mathematical and tend to the
 greatest, and this combination constitutes the perfection of things because
 what is accomplished is always the greatest good possible.
     The author should not deny the present creation of souls under the
 pretext that nothing is created here. It is the exact opposite. He should
 rather say that everything is continually created. Thus it is useless to
 dispute about the pre-existence of souls because whether they existed
 before or not, it is always true that God creates them at present. To say
 that souls descend from a superior world to an inferior world is to use
 metaphysical expressions, and the only truthful thing about them is that
 a soul may change its condition and increase or decrease in perfection
 without anyone determining the details since revelation does not explain
 anything about this; and, following reason, if the different degrees of
 creatures formed different worlds, there would be nothing that obliged us
 to stop at the three worlds of the author. And if, above the world of jezirah,
 there is the world of asiah, why would there not be yet another above that,
 and this to infinity? Thus, it is more reasonable to recognize an infinity of
 degrees in the perfections of the creations in the same world than to make
 different worlds, which only serves to astonish people with the novelty of
 the opinion. If the author wishes to call different worlds different kingdoms
 which interpenetrate, he will only find two real worlds among the creatures,
 the moral kingdom of spirits and the mechanical kingdom of bodies. It is
 true that subtle bodies pass through gross ones, but they only penetrate
 the body, while both subtle and gross bodies are equally penetrated by the
 souls and entelechies that are intimately connected to them.203
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration           63
Perhaps these rather lengthy comments provided the basis for Leibniz's discussion with van Helmont about the Seder Olam on August 9. For all his
criticisms, Leibniz was interested enough in van Helmont's theological speculations to continue the discussion over the following days, as the next journal
entries reveal:

  August 10

  Speculated with M. Helmont. His interpretations of Holy Scriptures are
  often peculiar, but inserted among them are some good thoughts with
  which I agree. We spoke almost the whole afternoon about this. About
  metempsychosis I cannot get an adequate proof.

   August 12

   I thought about Herr Helmont's ideas this morning so that I can give
   him my opinions about them.

   August 16

   With M. Helmont. He spoke for several hours about his ideas, among
   which I find not a few good ones with which I agree, but I have many
   doubts and especially some peculiar interpretations of Holy Scripture do
   not suit me. I find his intentions and character very good and praiseworthy;
   his tranquillity is also to be highly esteemed.

Leibniz left Hanover on August 17th and returned the afternoon of the 27th.
The very next day he was back visiting van Helmont.

  August 28

  Most of the afternoon spent with Herr Helmont.
      This week I have been distracted by many business matters, visitors,
  foreigners, and letter writing, so that I abandoned my journal. I will note
  down several things to keep them in mind. I considered many mechanicalphysical and other arts, manufactures, and trades with Herr Helmont and
  filled up several sheets of paper with them. 204

The next two entries in the journal dealing with van Helmont concern Leibniz's role in the publication of van Helmont's and von Rosenroth's works. In
64       Chapter Three

the first, Leibniz refers to the negotiations he had undertaken at the request of
van Helmont involving the publication of the second edition of van Helmont's
and von Rosenroth's translation ofBoethius' The Consolation of Philosophy.
This appeared in Liineburg in 1697 and Leibniz wrote the preface for it. The
second describes his involvement with two works of von Rosenroth, The
Harmony of the Evangelists, which was published, and the manuscript of
Messias Puer, which appears to have been lost.

     September 8

     To Herr Lipper at Liineburg about the German version of the Consolation of Philosophy of Boethius which he wants to delay ...

     September 12

     Friday I should have the copy of the Harmony of the Evangelists which is
     attributed to Ussher [Us serio]. There are some 3 or 4 pages in print, which
     are omitted. It is by Herr Rosenroth. It should be sent to the illustrious
     Herzog Rudolph August, but what is left of Messias Puer [should be sent]
     to Herzog Anton Ulrich ... 205

Leibniz's preface for the new edition of Boethius appears among his papers.
It is dated June 9, 1696 and offers fulsome praise for von Rosenroth's skills
as a poet. This preface was signed with van Helmont's name in the published
text and may therefore simply reflect van Helmont's views. However, as
something of a poet himself, Leibniz would have been interested in von
Rosenroth's translation of Boethius's Latin poetry. It is hard to believe that
he would have been so complimentary if he had really not admired von
Rosenroth's verse. One of the reasons van Helmont wished to have the book
republished was because the two Electresses had asked for further copies to
give to their friends. The interest of the Electresses may have provided an
additional incentive for leibniz's involvement in the project.

  ... for many years I looked for someone who could really give the meaning
  of the author's [Boethius] aforementioned verse in every place without any
  additions or departures [from the text]. Finally, in Sulzbach in the Upper
  Palatine I met Herr Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, a man very knowledgeable in all branches of philosophy, who translated the Latin verses
  into German at my request. He was so skillful that many learned people
  did not find any difference between the original text and the translation, so
  that it was justifiably said that if both had been published at the same time,
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration          65

   it would be difficult to distinguish which was the original and which came
   from it and which should be given preference.
      Now it recently happened that I came to Hanover and found that the
   Electresses of Brandenburg and Braunschweig were there, and as an old
   and well-known servant, I paid my respects. It happened that the two
   Electresses asked me some Christian and intelligent questions, indeed,
   question after question, so that they could increase the knowledge they
   have received from God, which accords with the meaning of the name of
   both Electresses, Sophia. For in the same degree that they shun hypocrisy
   and sham, so they are dedicated to the true reverence for God, which is the
   beginning of wisdom, and apply their minds to recognizing the true light
   and the source of all good. They do not seek to do this with empty words
   but with deeds. In doing this they rely on their God-given nobility to do
   many good things for others. And their favorite topic concerns how one
   may contribute to their primary goal of knowledge and love.
      Among other things, this small book ofBoethius called The Consolation
   of Philosophy was mentioned. The illustrious Electress of Branschweig
   said that not only did she read it with great pleasure but that she helped
   others with it, and that when she gave the copy she received from me to a
   person who had fallen into melancholy, this person was completely cured
   by reading the book. Therefore, at my departure, I was reminded to find
   and to send a number of copies of this book when I returned to Sulzbach.
   But because, as I have already said, no more were to be found, I wanted
   to have it reprinted on my return, hoping that it would edify and refresh
   many well-meaning people. 206

In his journal entry for September 13 Leibniz records that van Helmont has
departed for Cleve and Holland. On the 23rd he describes a letter from a
Herr Krafft dealing with the distillation of brandy. Herr Krafft had apparently
hoped that van Helmont was still present and could provide some practical
advice. In this same entry Leibniz records that van Helmont is staying with
Christian Messman, a businessman in Amsterdam. Finally, on September 26
he mentions a watchmaker in Hildesheim who taught his deaf and dumb
stepson to make "good, small" watches. He remarks on the fact that the boy
can make himself understood with signs. Van Helmont's first book, which is
in so many ways like the last book written by Leibniz in his name, claims
that the deaf and dumb can be taught to speak and read with great speed and
ease by using van Helmont's natural Hebrew alphabet. Leibniz must have
been thinking about these issues. 207 Sometime after van Helmont's departure
on September 23, Leibniz wrote a memorandum about van Helmont's philosophy for The Electress, which she then sent on to her niece, the Duchess
of Orleans. 208 Leibniz later wrote to van Helmont, passing on Herr Krafft's
66     Chapter Three

request along with some other queries about other manufacturing processes
and various alchemical matters. From van Helmont's reply, one can see that he
had a very poor opinion of Mr. Krafft. He offered Leibniz his own recipe for
making brandy from wheat instead. This letter reveals the close relationship
and mutual interests of the two men. Besides discussing distillation methods,
van Helmont describes how to make large mirrors and the kind of furnace
one would need in order to do this. He returns to the subject of the Princess
de Chimay, saying that he never pretended to have a "universal medicine,"
but that the medicine the Princess asks for is "good" and that he does know
how to prepare it. He closes by thanking Leibniz for his suggestions about
how to write more easily and by asking him to translate into Latin the Dutch
preface to one of his books:

  The reason for my silence was my illness, which was so violent that I was
  declared dead, as I reported to her Highness, Madam the Electress, in my
  letter of last month.
      To answer your letters, the first of which discusses the way to make
  from wheat an amount of eau de vie equal to that of wine, and what I could
   say about this to Mr. Krafft. 209 I would say to you that I would distance
  myself voluntarily from such people. But to you I can say that if I were
  to try this comfortably and without expense, I would take strong and clear
  beer of different kinds and distill two or three pots of each kind to see if in
  the second distillation I could produce an eau de vie without a bad taste, so
  that on the second distillation, having added lees of wine (what one calls
  wine dregs), it would acquire the taste of spirits of wine.
      I take into account the fact that the wheat that one distills does not
  have the same properties [as wine] and that one claims to gives them
  these qualities from the violence of the heat and by means of a sudden
  fermentation without considering that grapes ferment gently for two or
  three weeks before one presses the said juice and not the wine. After that
  one lets it ferment a long time until it becomes wine which is clear and
  ready to be distilled to make spirits. In the same way one can say of beer
  that it must have the time to ferment gently so that it becomes clear and
  strong enough to give good spirits, etc.
      The second question concerning my advice or opinion about how to
  make big mirrors or glass. If it were up to me to experiment, I would do it
  in a natural manner after carefully considering what is necessary to arrive
  at the end without difficulty and expense. I would take a fine glass suitable
  for making mirrors and grind it in a mortar of iron, which will make the
  glass good and blackish, and not spoil it as copper would.
      When I have several times made optical glass, I have put this powder in
  a mold made of white chalk, ground very fine and squeezed into circular
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration           67

  mold of iron, and I have put this in a reverberating furnace and this melts
  easily and very suddenly and the glass is not thick. The whole skill and
  difficulty consists in finding a furnace big enough for the glass. My advice
  would be to use the same kind of furnace one uses to refine some hundreds
  of marks of silver, when one can easily remove the entire coupelle [bottom
  receptacle in a refining furnace].
     As for the judgment of the Princess of Chimay, I gave my opinion last
  month to her most serene Highness, Madam the Electress. Many people
  think that I have the universal medicine, and the more I deny it, the more
  they believe it. But people of intelligence are entirely convinced that such
  a medicine does not exist in this world, because it is against nature: certain
  things are in our power, while certain things are not. Many people have
  asked me for remedies for this sick person, but not being a physician, I do
  not have the authority nor would I wish to have it in order not to fool the
  world. In regard to the said person, who is it who could say or assure me
  that she would be perfectly cured? Besides I suspect that an illness befell
  Boethius without cure.
     I am obliged to you for the good advice you have given me in regard to
  the way I might write easily, and to this end I send you a draft of several
  brief responses to the questions of a gentleman born deaf and dumb but
  who now speaks, which make up the preface of the book. I ask you to
  translate them as soon as possible into Latin, if you know enough Dutch. I
  would hope to have them no later than three weeks from now because then
  I would like to go to Holland. In the same way you will find the beginning
  of the same book. I remain as you know,

  H

  N.B. The medicine that Madame, the Princess of Chimay and many others
  ask for is not universal. But it is good and is prepared from cinnabar found
  in Hungary and also by the Neckar in the Palatine. I learned about this from
  Dr. Faust, the elder, a professor at Heidelberg. I have found it in the past
  for sale in Amsterdam, where one sells it in the manner of Holland for a
  great price. If it could be obtained from the Neckar it would be convenient.
  I have used mine up. I will be able to tell you how to prepare it and its
  effects at our meeting. 210

To my mind these letters and journal entries reveal that the intellectual relationship between Leibniz and van Helmont was far closer than scholars have
previously realized. Further evidence of Leibniz's interest in van Helmont's
ideas appears in other letters Leibniz wrote directly to him. In these letters
Leibniz repeatedly encourages van Helmont to jot down his thoughts. As we
68       Chapter Three

saw, in March, 1696 Leibniz wrote to van Helmont in Berlin, saying, "I recall
our conversations and I am glad to learn that you have resolved to communicate before long to the world some of your fine and important ideas.,,2l1
Van Helmont took Leibniz at this word. As the following letter shows, he not
only sent Leibniz copies of his newly printed works, but he fully expected
Leibniz to help in their writing and publication, as indeed Leibniz did with the
second edition of Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy as well as Thoughts
on Genesis. In this letter van Helmont asks Leibniz to act as a middle man
between himself and Professor Herman von der Hardt, who was apparently
adding material to one of von Rosenroth's books:
     Monsieur and very dear friend,
        You will have here the 150 Aphorisms together with the book about the
     return of the soul... .
        You will find attached to the said book the promised English title with
     the name of the author of the Book about hell.
        As for the other writings for Professor Hart, which should be added to
     the book of the concordance of the New Testament, of which Mr. Knorr
     von Rosenroth is the author, I entreat you to send them to him safely with
     my respects and to tell him that he can arrange for them to be printed with
     freedom as he sees fit, since I recognize that he is wise and discreet.
        As for the writings of Mr. Knorr von Rosenroth which his Serene Highness Monsieur the Duke Anton Ulrich of Brunswick asks for in order to
     have them printed, I have decided that since I hope to go to Amsterdam
     in a few days to take them with me to see if I cannot have them better
     printed there. That done, I will give a portion of them to you as well as to
     his Serene Highness. I remain as you know, Monsieur,

     H

  Letters can be sent to me at the house of Madame the Baroness of Merode,
  called Mutzfeld, at Emmerich, near Ter Borg.212
In his response to this letter Leibniz renews his request for more writings from
van Helmont, suggesting further ways to make the process painless. Aside
from this bit of practical advice, Leibniz's letter provides additional evidence
of his interest in and knowledge of van Helmont's published writings, and it
demonstrates once again Leibniz's personal involvement in the publication
of both van Helmont's and von Rosenroth's kabbalistic books. This letter
demonstrates that Leibniz read van Helmont's book with great attention great enough to notice that one of his aphorisms had been marked through
by a line, possibly to negate it. One can see that Leibniz is still mulling over
van Helmont's radical view of hell as well as his theory of transmigration,
       Leibniz and van H elmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration       69

the principal subject of the second book van Helmont had sent him. His
comments show that neither he nor the Electress have dismissed the theory
out of hand; they simply want more proof. Leibniz adds an objection made
by the Duchess of Orleans to van Helmont's belief that everything that dies
will eventually be reborn.

   I thank you, Monsieur, for the Chemical Aphorisms, the English title
  of the book about hell, and for the Two Hundred Problems in Favor of
  the Revolution [of souls]. I was careful to send to Professor Hart, for
  Monsieur the Duke Rudolph August, the supplement to the Harmony of
  the Evangelists by Monsieur Rosenroth, and I informed Duke Anton Ulrich
  about what you wish to do with the other work, whose title is Messias Puer.
      I see that the aphorisms that require that iron and copper should be
  joined with cinnabar are marked by a line which seems to cross them out.
  I believe that this is not unintentional.
      I hope the quantity of fine thoughts that you still have in metaphysics,
  mechanics, and ethics will be published in your lifetime. Although nothing
  perishes in the world, nevertheless, if they are published they can bear
  more fruit.
      Since almost all of your two hundred problems [concerning the transmigration of souls] are based on Scripture, Madame the Electress, who
  would like to see how one could confirm your ideas even further by reason,
  wishes one or two hundred proofs based on reason, order and experience.
  And since the problems have no connections between them but are as good
  as separate entities, she would be happy to see something similar in regard
  to the arguments from reason. I remember, Monsieur, that I already spoke
  to you about this. It would be sufficient if you would take a piece ofpaper
  without endeavoring to fill it all at once with a coherent meditation, which
  would tire you as much as the readers little used to meditations. On this
  paper you could write down from time to time separate proofs or clues
  as they come to mind without worrying about their order or connection.
  These would be easy for you to arrange afterwards, if there was need, after
  you had amassed the material, and it would be all the easier since there is
  no hurry.
      Madame the Duchess of Orleans alleges against your example of rabbits
  a contrary experience in the areas she knows where one has destroyed them
  as a result of hunting. But everything should be understood with moderation. The Spanish have certainly destroyed the men in several islands in
  America. The real question is, if it is true according to your opinion that
  when enough of a species is left to propagate the race, the births are more
  frequent after a great number of deaths. This fact needs to be verified more
  exactly ... . 213
70       Chapter Three

In suggesting that van Helmont jot down his ideas as they come to him
without trying to organize them into a coherent treatise, Leibniz was in fact
advocating exactly what he himself did. As Couturat says,
     Since he was always thinking, he noted down on paper, no matter where he
     was, even while traveling, the ideas that constantly came to him. Then he
     put aside these drafts and never reread them. In effect, their very accumulation hindered him from finding the ones he needed, and he had to begin
     again. 214
The question of whether the number of births equals that of deaths is not
as abstruse as it may at first appear. For van Helmont, the belief that the
dead were reborn, coupled with his conviction that the punishments of hell
were temporary and only designed to encourage repentance, was an important
aspect of his justification of God's goodness and justice, a subject bound to
interest Leibniz in terms of his own theodicy (see chapter six).
   The reference to Professor von der Hardt in this letter, as well as in van
Helmont's previous one, is significant. Hermann von der Hardt (1660-1746)
was the Duke of Brunswick's secretary, professor of oriental languages and
librarian at Helmstedt. He was a distinguished scholar, known for his Historia
Consillii Constanini. He was also a great admirer of van Helmont, as the
following excerpt from a letter to Leibniz reveals:
      I marvel at the genius of Helmont. I have learned many things from
     this man that could not be known except from him. In this old man I have
     observed not the traces but the every essence of the ancient first philosophy
     of Pythagoras, Plato, and the Cabbala. I have used the self-same ancient
     moral and symbolic philosophy, so clear is it for our deformed age. Two
     principles supply the foundation for the building: the pre-existence of souls
     and their revolution and transmigration. From these all other things flow.
     Nor is he churlish, as is everyone at present everywhere. 2lS
Testimony from such a man (and there were many more) should help further
to dispel the charge that van Helmont was an intellectliallightweight.
    In 1697, a year before van Helmont's death, the young Swedish scholar and linguist Erik Benzelius came to visit Leibniz. According to Marsha
Schuchard, Leibniz immediately sent Benzelius to see van Helmont, which
suggests yet again that Leibniz held van Helmont in high esteem. Schuchard
says that Benzelius recorded conversations he had with van Helmont about the
"Pythagorean Cabala," the very subject that Professor Hardt found so stimulating. Apparently it was through van Helmont that Benzelius was introduced
to the Philadelphian Society in London, a mystical group combining elements
of Rosicrucianism with Boehme's philosophy. But what is even more extraordinary is Schuchard's assertion that at this very time, when he was in close
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration            71

personal contact with van Helmont, Leibniz told Benzelius about "his plans
for a learned society which would combine Cabala and calculus, mysticism
and mechanics.,,216
   Shortly before van Helmont's death Leibniz wrote to him suggesting yet
another way to make writing easier. While joking about van Helmont's theory
of transmigration, or the revolution of souls, Leibniz again shows how much
he valued van Helmont's company and conversation. Anne Becco cites this
letter as evidence of Leibniz's willingness to make sarcastic jokes at van
Helmont's expense,217 but I leave it to the reader to decide if this is sarcasm
or a sign of concern and genuine affection:
  We were seriously afraid, Madame the Electress and myself, that you might
  have been kidnapped once again to be sent to the Inquisition for a second
  time. You have the important task, Monsieur, of taking care of your health
  and of giving yourself a rest until the revolution of springtime, when we
  hope you will return with the swallows. That return would be worth more
  for the moment than that of souls. I truly believe that the good intentions
  that we cannot achieve in this present life do not perish for all that, neither
  for the world nor for ourselves. But it is always better to achieve as much
  here as one can to make good use of our time, so that I would be very
  pleased to see many more of your works. It would not be bad to write them
  in the form of questions and answers. Thus, those with whom you talk
  would give you the opportunity to write. I wish you would use more ink
  and paper than Mr. Hiibener has used thus far. 218
Presumably Mr. Hiibener was Leibniz's amanuensis. In the copy of this letter
preserved in Hanover his name is followed by an asterisk with the following
note at the bottom of the page: "This served admirably well to reveal adroitly
to Mr. Helmont that Madame the Electress did us the grace to read this letter."
This note gives a further indication of the interest the Electress took in van
Helmont.
   Van Helmont never did make it back to Hanover. He died in December,
while staying with his cousin, Madame de Merode. On learning of van Helmont's death, Leibniz wrote immediately to Madame Merode, expressing his
and the Electress' sorrow. It was at Madame Merode's request that Leibniz
composed the epitaph quoted at the beginning of this work. The letter reveals
once again the strength of Leibniz's feeling and admiration for van Helmont:
  I did not fail to take your letter to Madame the Electress of Brunswick, who
  will reply to you at once. But she expressed most emphatically her sorrow
  at the death of such an excellent and great person as the late Baron of
  Helmont, whom she honored with her friendship in an entirely uncommon
  manner. You may judge, Madame, how much this touching news must
72       Chapter Three

     have affected me, since I was imagining with very great pleasure his return
     during the year we are entering. But God has ordained things otherwise.
     The solid virtue that he showed on every kind of occasion and the great
     zeal he had for the general good, which I consider as an effect of the love
     of God for everything, makes me hope that he is happy. And I even believe
     that the seeds of truth that he sowed throughout the world will not be
     unprofitable.
         If he added some things that were not entirely certain, it does not matter.
     It is permissible for great geniuses to propose their conjectures. It is to be
     hoped that none of the thoughts perish, of which he may have left some
     traces. You will judge, Madame, if it is appropriate to send his papers to
     some place where one can guarantee them from loss. Above all, inquiries
     should be made [to see] if any [papers] were left with people he knew.
         I wrote the enclosed epitaph to carry out your orders and to show my
     feelings about the deceased. But a more skillful man would have been
     needed to speak of him as he deserved. For the rest, I remain,

                                                                           Leibniz

     PS. I hope that his last written work, which he began with you, will
     contain something essential. 219

Leibniz passed on the news of van Helmont's death to various of his correspondents. To Lorenz Hertel, for example, he wrote, "I must in spite of myself
send you news ofthe death of Monsieur van Helmont.,,22o The very phrasing
indicates a far from perfunctory reaction to van Helmont's death. A little more
than a week later, Leibniz wrote again to Hertel, lamenting the simplicity and
lack of ceremony with which van Helmont had been buried: "Ceremonies
are for Princes. Our good Monsieur Helmont was buried without trumpet or
carillon.,,221 This remark seems uncannily prescient when one thinks about
Leibniz's own simple and unattended burial.
   In her reply to Leibniz Madame de Merode says that, following his advice,
she has gone to Holland to search for any papers van Helmont might have left
with his friends and that she has also written down what she can remember of
his conversation during the last seven weeks of his life. She makes the interesting comment that she has had to respond to many attacks on her cousin's
philosophy made by both Jews and Christians who do not really understand
his views. She concludes by asking Leibniz if he knows the whereabouts of
a Latin book containing four hundred passages from Scripture supporting the
doctrine of transmigration. The way Madame Merode describes this book
makes it seem that it had been written for van Helmont by someone else in
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration          73

exactly the same way that Leibniz had written van Helmont's Thoughts on
Genesis:
  ... Following your advice, Monsieur, I myself made a trip to Holland to
  find one of his friends fitted to the task of collecting what is found of his
  papers. I have also written down what he told me during the last seven
  weeks of his stay with us. His last writings were scattered prefaces, but
  for all that they contain some profound thoughts. And so that nothing will
  be lost and so that one might look everywhere to unearth still other papers
  kept by one or another, I have found one of his great friends, who, being
  honest and discreet, is willing to take on this task in case I do not survive
  my confinement, which is fast approaching. But if it pleases God and the
  master of life for me to continue mine, I will do this myself.
      I have received many attacks, as much from Jews as from other people,
  concerning the opinions of the late Baron of Helmont. But I replied as best
  I could by showing the contrary by well founded proofs. And since most
  [of his critics] do not understand his ideas, I had the occasion to present
  them with his true thoughts, which are not contrary to the facts but only
  to the opinion of our Theologians. But these authorities does not prove
  anything in my opinion. I believe that the opinions of the late Baron van
  Helmont, having the support of Scripture, nature, and reason on their side,
  are much more probable.
      I am looking for a book written in Latin, containing four hundred passages from sacred Scripture proving the Revolution [of souls], which the
  late Mr. van Helmont was about to have printed. Since I cannot learn anything about it here, I thought it might be with you, Monsieur, or at least
  that I might know if you saw it anywhere. In making his last trip through
  Germany, my cousin received it from an illustrious person on the condition
  that he would return it to its owner, who is now asking me for it. Besides,
  I have at present a very good chance of getting it translated and printed for
  the usefulness of many people who eagerly inquire about the opinions of
  the late Baron van Helmont. You would do me a great favor, Monsieur, if
  you know about the book and can give me any information. I remember
  having heard my cousin talk about the printing of this book, but I have
  forgotten the name of the place. 222
Leibniz's reply shows that he is still genuinely concerned with preserving
van Helmont's papers and had not suggested this out of mere politeness. He
praises Madame Merode for her efforts but says that van Helmont had never
shown him the book she described. He suggests that it might be found in
Sulzbach. He tells her that he would like to publish van Helmont's memoirs
because he thinks they are unusual and instructive, but he thinks they too
may be in Sulzbach. He also says that he would like someone to make a list
74       Chapter Three

of the books van Helmont had printed. Leibniz seems clearly to regret his
friend's death and the fact that his books only revealed a part of what he really
thought. He closes by reiterating his wish that van Helmont's scientific and
mechanical inventions be preserved:
     What you are doing to try to save the thoughts of the late Monsieur, your
     uncle, comply with his last wishes, although he never told you them. He
     never showed us the book of passages from Scripture which you speak
     about. It will be necessary to look for it elsewhere, rather than here with
     us. Perhaps it will be found in Sulzbach.
        I would like someone to publish his memoirs, which are unusual and
     instructive, but I think they too must be looked for in Sulzbach. I would
     also like someone to make a collection of what he had printed. The trouble
     is that, as he himself admitted to me, most of his books do not entirely,
     but only partly, conform to what he really believed. I also hope that his
     scientific and mechanical discoveries will not be lost, and that one would
     give, for example, a description with an illustration of his implement to
     spin with two hands, as well as of other similar things.
        When Monsieur van Helmont was with us the last time he found a man
     from Danzig who appeared to be very taken with his opinions. He did not
     tell us his name. Perhaps this person, if one knew who it was, could give
     you information about the work in question. 223
Even after his death, Leibniz still hoped to learn more about van Helmont's
ideas from his remaining papers.
   There is one further letter that should be mentioned because it could be
taken as evidence of Leibniz's sarcastic opinion about van Helmont's belief
in the transmigration of souls. Writing to the Electress Sophie Charlotte
of Brandenburg on April 27, 1699, Leibniz tells her he has been asked by
curious people about van Helmont, and he speculates that if van Helmont had
lived longer he would have provoked a formal war with the theologians. He
mentions a recent dissertation attacking the religion of the elder van Helmont.
The author apparently was threatening to direct a similar attack against the
son, and Leibniz muses about the battle that van Helmont's death has made
unnecessary. Once again it is up to the reader to decide whether or not Leibniz
shows himself to be a "mordant" and "sarcastic" critic of van Helmont, as
alleged:
  Several curious people have asked me about the details of Mr. van Helmont's life. I think they should go to Monsieur the Prince Regent of
  Sulzbach, who knew him longer.
     If the good man had continued to live and write, there would have been
  a formal war with the theologians, one of whom has already produced
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration          75

  a Helmontian Theology in a dissertation printed in Helmstadt, where he
  speaks, however, only of the religion of the father, Jan Baptista van Helmont, the famous doctor and chemist, who also mixed religion and science.
  But since he [the younger van Helmont] does this incomparably more, this
  same author, who has written against the father, threatens the son with
  a similar dissertation. In this case I would have advised him to make an
  alliance with Monsieur the Raugrave. 224 As for the other side, I would
  procure allies for Monsieur Helmont, because net long ago a little book
  was printed in Paris with the title Metaphysical Meditations which tries
  to establish the transmigration of souls. It is too bad that this great war,
  which would furnish us with an opera, is fallen by the wayside because of
  the death of the good man. I do not know if it is a revolution of his soul,
  as he would say, but I always know that it is his idea that still gives us
  pleasure. 225

One last document concerning Leibniz and the Kabbalah must be discussed,
a document published by Foucher de Careil under the tendentious title
Refutation inedite de Spinoza par Leibniz. Foucher de Careil's concern
with defending Leibniz against the charge of Spinozism led him to give
this manuscript a title which it did not originally have and which does not
acurately reflect its contents. As Friedmann has emphasized - and as anyone
reading the text can see - Leibniz is not primarily concerned with refuting
Spinoza; he is more interested in pointing out the ways in which Spinoza's
philosophy distorted the Kabbalah and in relating both Spinoza's ideas and
those of the Kabbalah to his own philosophy.
   What provoked Leibniz to write this work was the publication in 1706
of Elucidarius Cabalisticus seu de Recondita Hebraeorum philosophia (An
Exposition of the Kabbalah, or the Secret Philosophy of the Hebrews) by
Johann Georg Wachter. In this book Wachter modified the position he had
taken in his earlier work Der Spinozismus im Jiidenthumb, oder die von
dem heutigen Jiidenthumb und dessen geheimen Kabbala vergotterte Welt
(Spinozism in Judaism, or contemporary Judaism, or the pantheistic world
of contemporary Jews and their secret Kabbala). In the later book, while
reiterating the view that there were similarities between the Kabbalah and
Spinoza's philosophy, Wachter defended both against the charge of pantheism.
He took an astonishingly positive - all the more astonishing because he
expressed himself publically - view of the Kabbalah for the time, concluding
that it should be tolerated and even taught in schools and universities because
it had no more failings that other philosophies routinely included in the
curriculum, including those of Aristotle and Descartes.
   The fact that Leibniz bothered to annotate Wachter's book indicates that
the Kabbalah still very much interested him. This is the conclusion Fried76      Chapter Three

mann reached in his excellent book Leibniz et Spinoza. He goes as far as to
say that "Leibniz took the Kabbalah under his protection" in these annotations and that they offer confirmation of "the singular interest Leibniz had in
the Kabbalah and the Kabbalism of Spinoza.,,226 Leibniz also defends von
Rosenroth against Wachter's accusation that he did not reveal the true Kabbalah: "The author declares that Knorr did not unveil the real Kabbalah or
secret philosophy of the Hebrews, but only empty formulas. Knorr revealed
everything as he found it, good and bad. 227 Leibniz's annotations are much
more of an analysis, or even meditation on the Kabbalah, than a refutation.
As his repeated use of such phrases as "Quant a moi"(p. 39), "Je blame" (p.
15), "a mon avis" (p. 25), "je reponds" (p. 29) reveals, he first notes down
an opinion and then reflects upon it. Reading Wachter's book made Leibniz
think further about the major philosophical issues which preoccupied him.
For example, in the following paragraph, he describes both the Kabbalists
view of substance and Spinoza's and then compares both to his own. What is
important here is that he does not refute either view, but simply says neither
has attained the full truth:

   The Cabalists seem to say that the creation or existence of matter is impossible because its essence is so vile and that, therefore, there is absolutely
   no matter, or that spirit and matter are the same thing, as Henry More
   maintains in his cabbalistic theses. Spinoza also declares it impossible that
   God created some corporeal mass and material as the stuff of this world,
   "because," he says, "those who have the opposite opinion do not know
   what divine power could create [such a thing]." There is some truth in this,
   but I do not believe it is understood sufficiently. In effect, matter exists
   but it is not a substance since it is an agregate or composite made up of
   substances. I mean, it is secondary matter, or extended mass, and not a
   homogenous body. But what we conceive of as homogeneous and what we
   call primary matter is something incomplete since it is pure potential. On
   the contrary, substance is full and active. 228

The surprisingly mild tone of Leibniz's comments about Spinoza throughout
these annotations is explained by the fact that they were not intended for
publication. When Leibniz mentions Spinoza in a letter or work intended for
publication, his tone is much sharper and more critical. After the publication of the Theologico-Political Treatise in 1670, Spinoza had become the
philosopher most people loved to hate, and the degree with which an author
reviled Spinoza's philosophy became a measure of his own orthodoxy. Leibniz, no less than anyone else, felt the need to criticize Spinoza in public, as the
following excerpt from a later letter to Bourguet indicates. Here he mentions
Wachter's book, but what is particularly interesting is that while he criticizes
       Leibniz and van Helmont: Their Friendship and Collaboration        77

Spinoza, he expressly defends the Kabbalah and accuses Spinoza of misusing
and misunderstanding it:
  It is utterly true that Spinoza abused the Cabala of the Hebrews. And
  a certain person, who converted to Judaism and called himself Moses
  Germanus, followed his perverse opinions, as is shown in a refutation in
  German written by Dr. Wachter, who knew him. But perhaps the Hebrews
  themselves and other ancient authors, especially in the East understand the
  proper meaning. Indeed, Spinoza formulated his monstrous doctrine from
  a combination of the Cabala and Cartesianism, corrupted to the extreme.
  He did not understand the nature oftrue substance or monads .... 229
,From all the evidence adduced, it seems accurate to say that Leibniz did
 indeed value van Hemont's friendship and his kabbalistic philosophy. It is
 the purpose of the remaining chapters to show the precise ways in which van
 Helmont's ideas acted as catalysts in the development of Leibniz's own.
                               CHAPTER FOUR

                      The Kabbalah and Monads

Most commentators are willing to agree that Leibniz's substitution of "force"
for "mind" as the defining characteristic of substance represented an evolution
in his thinking that ultimately banished the last traces of Cartesian dualism
from his system and led to the concept of monads. In the Discourse substances
are divided into two essentially different classes, those with minds which are
imperishable and those without minds which, although they continue to exist,
essentially perish as individuals because of their lack of mind and memory:
  [Paragraph 34] ... no substance perishes, although it can become completely
  different. They also express the whole universe, although more imperfectly
  than minds do. But the principal difference is that they do not know what
  they are nor what they do, and consequently, since they do not reflect on
  themselves, they cannot discover necessary and universal truths. It is also
  because they lack reflection about themselves that they have no moral qualities. As a result, though they may pass through a thousand transformations,
  like those we see when a caterpillar changes into a butterfly, yet from the
  moral or practical point of view, the result is as if they had perished; indeed,
  we may even say that they have perished physically, in the sense in which
  we say that bodies perish through their corruption. But the intelligent soul,
  knowing what it is - having the ability to utter the world "I," a word so full
  of meaning - does not merely remain and subsist metaphysically, which it
  does to a greater degree than the others, but also remains the same morally
  and constitutes the same person. For it is memory or the know ledge of this
  self that renders it capable of punishment or reward.
The next paragraph is entitled "The Excellence of Minds and that God considers them preferable to Other Creatures. That Minds Express God Rather than
the World, but that other Substances Express the World rather than God." Here
Leibniz again stresses the discontinuity between substances with and without
minds: " ... the difference between intelligent substances and substances that
have no intelligence at all is just as great as the difference between a mirror

                                             The Kabbalah and Monads         79
and someone who sees.'>230 This discontinuity between minds and mindless
substances still appears in the New System of 1695,231 but it entirely disappears in the Monadology, where all monads are defined as having perceptions
and the only thing that differentiates them is the clarity of these perceptions:
"... if, in our perceptions, we had nothing distinct, or, so to speak, in relief
and stronger in flavor, we would always be in a stupor. And this is the state
of bare monads.,,232
    Thus, between the writing ofthe New System in 1695 and the Monadology
Leibniz developed a philosophical system in which substance is defined
in terms of activity, perception, and unity, and no substance perishes, they
simply experience transformations. It is during this period that Garber sees
Leibniz moving away from Aristotelian realism to phenomenalism. But as I
 suggested earlier, it is more plausible to argue that Leibniz was eliminating
the last remnants of dualism from his system and embracing an essentially
gnostic conception of matter based on a theory of emanation. Leibniz was
cognizant of many different emanationist theories, just as he was aware of the
 many different incipient monadologies of such thinkers as Nicoloas of Cusa,
Cardano, Bruno, Paracelsus, and the elder van Helmont. Since it has been
 suggested that Leibniz's monadology emerged from these theories, especially
those presented by Bruno, it is important to review them and weigh their
 influence in comparsion to that of van Helmont's.
    Many characteristics of Leibniz's monadology appear in Nicolas ofCusa's
 (1401-1464) descripion of individual substances. For example, Cusanus
attributes a unique principle or internal law of development to each existent being, which acts as a kind of force shaping its development. In his
view the universe is a harmonious whole, to which every individual contributes. In a late work, the De beryllo (1458), he draws an analogy between
"beryl", a mineral used from Roman times to enhance reading vision,233
and creation, suggesting that the divine unity produces diversity in the same
way that light is refracted through a lens. Such ideas anticipate Leibniz's
conception of monads as "mirrors," which develop through their own inner
force and coexist in a harmonious whole. Girolamo Cardano (1501-1614)
also envisioned the universe as wholly animated and existing as a unity of
vital forces. Giordano Bruno (1548-1600), however, is the philosopher who
is most often cited as the source of Leibniz's monadology. Like Leibniz,
Bruno was an animist and he described the universe as infinite in space and
time. He used the term monad, and it has been suggested by several scholars
that Leibniz derived the word from him. 234 Like Leibniz's monads, Bruno's
are immaterial and characterized by spirit and force. They are both physical
and psychic, and they all reproduce in their own individual way the divine
monad. Like Bruno's monads, Leibniz's can evolve to a higher state or sink
80     Chapter Four

to a lower one, but while Bruno's monads constantly rise and fall, Leibniz's
eventually reach perfection, as I will argue in chapter six. Bruno's philosophy was also pantheistic; each monad was essentially a part of God. Leibniz
consistently rejected pantheism, although how successful he was in banishing
it from his own philosophy is debatable. Thus, while there are similarities
between Bruno's concept of monads and Leibniz's, there are also important
differences, which suggest to me that one should look for other more accessible and more contemporary sources. Among these, both Paracelsus and the
elder van Helmont are clearly important, but, while Leibniz knew both these
sources - in fact, he had read their works at an early age - he became reacquainted with them through his contact with the younger van Helmont. As
we have seen, Francis Mercury van Helmont's philosophy was an amalgam
of Renaissance occultism and Paracelsian and Helmontian philosophy, but
it had the additional and very important element of the Lurianic Kabbalah.
In my opinion, the kabbalistic theories of the younger van Helmont provided the catalyst that shaped Leibniz's monadology. The considerable number
of letters and notes dealing with van Helmont's ideas which Leibniz wrote
between 1694 and 1698 reveal the subtle but important ways in which Leibniz's thinking changed and developed as he became increasingly aware of
van Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy.
    After van Helmont left Hanover in March of 1696, Leibniz wrote a summary of what he and the Electress Sophie had heard in those daily morning
meetings in her study. This document, which was given the heading "Leibniz's gentle opinion about the doctrines of Francis Mercury van Helmont"
by Leibniz's copyist, is important because it brings up some of the ideas that
will become fully elaborated in Leibniz's Monadology. Leibniz begins by
questioning once again the factual basis of van Helmont's argument that the
dead are replaced by equal numbers of new births (which to van Helmont
proved the transmigration of souls). While reaffirming his agreement with
van Helmont that animals have souls, he moves closer to the Monadology
by blurring the sharp distinction between souls with and without mind. All
souls, he says, are "similar" and equally immortal. An interesting statement
follows to the effect that each soul progresses until it reaches perfection and
that all men should work to better the world. I will return to these ideas in
chapters five and six when discussing Leibniz's theory of individual freedom
and his theodicy. After a break in the text, an extremely important paragraph
appears in which Leibniz discusses the concept of "unity." Because Leibniz
was writing in German, he was forced to devise a German term for unity. As
the text shows, he came up with the term "Einigkeiten." In a footnote, which
he added later to the copy of this document written out by his amanuensis,
he comments that "Einheiten" would have been a more suitable term. This
                                             The Kabbalah and Monads           81

change in word choice indicates that during this period his philosophical ideas
were in the process of development. The document breaks off with a further
discussion of how everything will eventually reach maturity and perfection.
I have once again highlighted the sections relevant for my argument:

  I am not disputing that in my judgment many of Mr. van Helmont's opinions
  still remain vague and unproven, especially, indeed, his principal theory
  concerning the transmigration of souls, namely that souls go immediately
  from dead bodies into new bodies and that the same souls always play on
  this stage. Indeed, he thinks that there remain at all times approximately
  both the same number of people on earth as also of all the animals of both
   sexes. But I should almost doubt this from history and believe that the
  world has not always been inhabited in the same way. And I don't know if
  one could say with good reason that therefore somewhere else the number
   of wolves increased because the wolves in England were exterminated. It
   will also be found in the printed baptismal and death registers of the city
   of London that after the great plague, the departed were hardly replaced
  by such an exceedingly large number of births but by the influx of new
  residents. Nor am I disputing that more and earlier marriages occur since
   after such a decimation [of the population], the people have more room to
   find food and thus mUltiply. Meflnwhile I am in agreement with him in many
  things about which neither common teaching nor the new opinions of the
   Cartesians can agree. In general it is said that animals have soul and life but
  that the souls die with the destruction of their bodies; human beings alone
  are excepted, which might be suspicious to some, especially if one appeals
  to faith, which appears to be a crutch. The Cartesians, seeing this and
  concerned that, if the souls of animals can die, then even the souls of men
  may run the same risk, have professed that only human beings really have
  a soul, but animals, on the other hand, are nothing but artificial clockwork
  mechanisms driven by fire and wind and without feeling. According to
  their opinion, when animals scream they feel no more than an organ pipe.
  The whole of nature itself strongly argues against them, [nature] which in
  many ways shows that animals do feel and that they are not mere puppets or
  marionettes. One clearly sees that the Cartesians do not base their opinion
  on reason or experience but on their own self love because they only love
  themselves and will only accept those things which elevate human nature,
  as if what man likes must be true. However, in the meanwhile they are not
  wrong if they take all souls as similar in this matter and understand that
  they must all either be mortal or immortal. I consequently agree with the
  general teaching about this, that animals really have souls and feeling.
  Indeed, I agree with many ancient and wise teachers that everything in the
  whole of nature is full of power, life, and souls. It follows that the more
82   Chapter Four

 virtues one has and the more good one has done the greater will be his
 happiness and pleasure. Concerning this I could mention a great many
 other reasons to prove that one already has reason to be pleased not only
 because everything that will be must be but also because everything that
 happened is so well ordered that if we understood it correctly, we could
 not wish for anything better. And here lies the difference between souls
 endowed with reason and other souls; those able to care about learning
 and government act on a small scale in their province and little world as
 God does in the whole world - just as little Gods make little worlds which
 cannot fade away or disappear like the large world (of which they are the
 image). Rather, with time they near their purpose as does the greater world
 with them. Therefore the remaining souls and all bodies have to serve those
 souls which alone are united with the great God in a kind of society and
 association for the sake of their own eternal happiness. For at the same
 time through this service they themselves reach their perfection. The whole
 world is like one body which proceeds to its goal without being hindered
 because nothing in itself can be hindered and there is nothing beyond it
 that can hinder it.
    As to what concerns the sun, I do not dispute that we belong to its realm
 nor that the earth itself, which we inhabit and dominate, is anything other
 than one of the planets which goes around the immovable sun. But that
 the pagans take the sun as the seat of the All Highest is a mistake because
 they did not know the structure of the universe. Nowadays one knows that
 each fixed star is its own sun which, by all appearance, has its planets, or
 assigned worlds, as our sun. I do not doubt that each sun is equally subject
 to a higher authority and that all such regents will, in tum, be ruled. At
 some time eventually everything will be under the All Highest ruler. Men
 have only begun to understand the secret of the small as well as the large
 world in our time after both the circulation of the blood was discovered
 and the true revolution of the planets (by means of the telescope). If men
 continue as far as they have in the last hundred years, they will reveal
 further wonderful and beautiful aspects of nature and give always more
 reason to respect the creator and to take pleasure in his creation. One
 would have wished that for the past thirty years the great King of France
 would, or could, have further increased human happiness by advancing
 knowledge (as he did at first) instead of [promoting] the war which made
 Europe unhappy. Thus we would already have experienced much that our
 descendants will be the first to see. Nevertheless I am of the opinion that
 high-ranking persons, especially, 'who can produce much good must not
 neglect to do so, even if the usefulness may not appear for a long time.
 [They should do this] not only for the sake of glory but also because those
                                           The Kabbalah and Monads           83

who plant but do not see the growth, nevertheless will one day enjoy the
fruit thereof to their greatttr glory, since such an act brings with it the
immutable highest order. [A break in the text occurs here]
     ... Lenses also exhibit countless living but otherwise invisible creatures so that there are far more souls than grains or dust particles in the
sun. However, I lean towards the doctrine already held by Plato (which
Pythagoras before him brought from the East) that no soul disappears,
 including the' souls of animals. Herr Helmont agrees with my opinion on
 this matter, although I have not yet been sufficiently able to see his evidence
 or reasons. As for my reasons, I once exchanged letters on this subject with
 the famous Herr Arnauld, formerly head of the Jansenists, and I mainly
 emphasized that all bodies have parts. Consequently they are nothing but
 a swarm or multiplicity, like a herd of sheep or a pond full of drops of
 water and fish or a clock full of wheels and attachments. But just as all
 numbers are derivedfrom one plus one, so must all multiplicity be derived
from unity.
     For this reason unity is the proper root and seat of all existence, of all
force, and of all sensation; and these constitute the soul. From this one
 has irrefutable proof that souls exist, that everything must be full of souls,
 what the nature of a soul is, and, finally, why each soul is indestructible.
 For unity has no parts, otherwise it would be multiplicity. But what has no
 parts is indestructible. Herr Arnauld himself, as acute as his intelligence
 was, after he understood this properly, he did not know what to say against
 it but that the matter appeared to him wondrous strange and new. I find that
 a very famous doctor of the Catholic Church called St. Thomas Aquinas
 was not far from this opinion because he said that the souls of animals
 were also indivisible. Their indestructibility follows from this, which he
 may not have wished to say as clearly, but he allowed himself the pleasure
 of laying the foundation.
     One might object that, indeed, everything that I say might be true but
that it is little consolation; for although our souls and other souls remain,
yet the memory of the present is lost. I have a different opinion about this.
I do not dispute that we do not perhaps remember all of our present actions
immediately after death, which is neither natural nor proper. Yet it happens
that everything that has ever happened to us remains eternally imprinted
on the soul, even if it does not come to mind every moment. In the same way
we know many things which we do not remember unless a special reason
gives us the opportunity and makes us think about it. Who can always
think of everything? But, nevertheless, nothing in nature is in vain or is
lost. But everything reaches its perfection and maturity. So every picture
received by our soul will someday form a whole with its further body so
84       Chapter Four

     that finally one will survey everything as in a bright mirror and be able to
     take the best o/them/or one s greater pleasure. From this it follows ... [the
     text breaks off at this point].235

A year after this summary was completed, Leibniz collaborated with van
Helmont on his last book, which indicates that he was conversant enough
with van Helmont's ideas and arguments to write as if he were van Helmont.
He neither would nor could have done this unless he found value in van
Helmont's theories. That he did appears from the oblique comments he makes
about the book. For example, in 1698 Leibniz wrote a letter to Andre Morell,
mentioning that van Helmont had given him a copy of his book on the four
first chapters of Genesis, which had been translated into Latin from an English
original. Leibniz comments on the book briefly, adding his usual disclaimer
about not accepting all of van Helmont's ideas:
  He (Helmont) has given me a copy of his book on the beginning of Genesis.
  He is also of the opinion of Origen. I remember that he told me that M.
  Wetstein in Amsterdam printed it in Latin from an English version. There
  is also one in German. He has many very good thoughts, but also some
  for which I do not see any proof, particularly his metempsychosis. For the
  rest, I have a very high opinion of him for many reasons ... 236
Leibniz's letter was disingenuous to say the least. As we now know through
the excellent detective work of Anne Becco, the book was not written by
van Helmont and it had not been originally written in English. It was written
by Leibniz in Latin, as the photocopies of Leibniz's original draft make
perfectly clear. 237 And while many of van Helmont's most cherished ideas
appear in the book, it is hard to say precisely where van Helmont's thought
ends and Leibniz's begins. As Leibniz says in a note at the beginning of
the manuscript, "Although I wanted to express the opinions of my friend,
nevertheless ... I have also added many thought of my own, which agree with
not a few of my friend's ideas.,,238
   As I mentioned earlier, the very fact that Leibniz wrote this book for van
Helmont cries out for an explanation. At the very least it would seem to show
that Leibniz took van Helmont's ideas seriously. But I would go even further
and suggest that there are certain key ideas in this text that point to the changes
in Leibniz's notion of substance that eventually led him from Aristotelian
realism to monadological idealism. The text opens with a commentary on the
phrase in Genesis 1:1, "he created." Leibniz denies that creation could be ex
nihilo in the way that term is commonly understood. He argues instead for
some kind of emanation of visible things from invisible, likening this process
to the production or "hatching" of seeds. The denial of creation ex nihilo
and the analogy between creation and the hatching of "seeds" are both key
                                              The Kabbalah and Monads           85

concepts in the Lurianic !<abbalah, and they have important implications for
Leibniz's fully developed notion of monads and his theodicy, which I will
return to later in this chapter.
  ... And so creation ex nihilo is not based on sacred Scripture but rather on a
  certain tradition and can be accepted in a reasonable way. But as commonly
  received, it is not without error. Indeed, it is true that chaos or atoms did
  not exist or.any other matter coeternal with God from which the world
  was made. But, nevertheless, it is false that the world was strictly speaking
  made from nothing, as if from some material. It is an eternal truth that
  nothing can be made from nothing. Therefore it is more correct to agree
  with the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, cap. 11, v. 3, that visible things
  are made from invisible. That is in the lofty realm of Aelohim himself the
  seeds of this corporeal world were hidden in an ideal or spiritual fashion.
  At some time these seeds were finally produced and hatched. 239
Further interesting points occur in Leibniz's commentary on Genesis 1: 3,
"And God saw that it was good." He reiterates one of van Helmont's principle
ideas, namely that God created by thinking, an idea I will come back to in
the final chapter. Leibniz also includes an idea that became absolutely central
to his philosophy, that there is no such thing as time for God; time is merely
relative:
  ... He saw, he considered, he thought within himself, but nevertheless as
  if there were some object apart from himself: a certain genuine idea is
  produced through a word in the mind, as has already often been observed.
  Nor should the passage be taken as it commonly is, as if Elohim had created
  light first and then had seen that it was good by observation. This way of
  perceiving the goodness of things is unworthy of God, whose nature is
  to see things a priori. Indeed, it is unworthy of the omniscient to make
  things first and then consider whether it was done well. "Act first and think
  afterwards," as the Italians say. Truly, therefore, while he saw, he created,
  or while he saw that it was good, he wished, and while he wished, he
  created. 24o
It is my opinion that behind this text written by Leibniz in van Helmont's
name lies another text written by van Helmont, a text that first appeared in
the first volume of the Kabbala Denudata (1677) expressly as a refutation
of what van Helmont took to be the caricature of genuine kabbalistic ideas
presented by Henry More in his Cabala of the Eagle, the Boy, and the Bee. 241
Brown admits that van Helmont's concept of monads is far closer to Leibniz's
than that presented by More. But because Brown does not believe Leibniz
came into contact with van Helmont's kabbalistic ideas until after his mature
philosophy had been formulated, he rejects the possible influence of this text.
86     Chapter Four

But if Brown is wrong about the key decade in Leibniz's development, as
I think he is, and if we can say that decade occurred from 1688 to 1698,
then it is plausible to argue that this text is significant. As we have seen,
in the notes Leibniz made describing his visit to von Rosenroth in 1688, he
specifically says he "read over" the Kabbala Deundata and therefore read this
text. And since Leibniz had read and annotated More's work,242 this dialogue
may have especially interested him because it contained some of the same
criticisms that Leibniz launched against both Cartesians and those like More
who believed in "vital principles." In his view both were essentially dualistic
and consequently, if inadvertently, promoted atheism and materialism, while
at the same time undermining a viable theodicy. As the notes Leibniz took
at Sulzbach make clear, he was especially interested in kabbalistic ideas of
creation as a process of the emanation of divine light, an idea that appears
in axiom 47 of the Monadology. These ideas were basic to van Helmont's
philosophy and reappear in his books, all of which were read by Leibniz
during these key years in the development of his own monadology. These
same ideas were bound to come up again during the numerous occasions
between 1694 and 1698 when Leibniz saw and spoke with van Helmont.
But because we were not privy to van Helmont's conversations with Leibniz,
except as they were filtered through Leibniz's own mind, it is critical to tum
to van Helmont's dialogue because it provides a succinct summary of his
kabbalistic philosophy.
    Van Helmont categorically denies that More had given an accurate summary of kabbalistic ideas. He is particularly eager to refute More's claim that the
kabbalistic doctrine of emanation conflicts with the orthodox Christian doctrine of creation ex nihilo and consequently smacks of atheistic, pantheistic,
and Spinozistic materialism, as More claims. He expands on ideas that Leibniz alluded to briefly in the first sections of his commentary on Genesis quoted
above, namely that creation cannot occur ex nihilo, but must have occurred
through some kind of emanation, much as the mind produces a thought or
seeds a plant, the very same analogies used by Leibniz. Van Helmont makes
the somewhat ingenious distinction between the use of ex and ab in Latin:
the first refers to the creation of something from a material entity, the second
to the agent of creation, an agent that is in no way diminished by the act of
creating:

  the preposition ex is only used in regard to matter; it cannot properly pertain
  to spirit, which is the cause of creation, strictly speaking. Concerning this
  [creation], it is in no way possible to say that anything is or is not made out
  of [ex] something but only that it is made by [ab] something. Similarly, we
  cannot say that an idea is made out of [ex] the soul or mind but by [ab] a
  mind, etc. 243
                                             The Kabbalah and Monads          87

To my mind this longer explanation lies behind Leibniz's brief and otherwise
incomprehensible comment quoted above to the effect that "it is false that the
world was strictly speaking made from nothing, as if from some material."
   During the same time that Leibniz was writing van Helmont's Thoughts
on Genesis, he interpreted his discovery of the binary system as the only
way truly to understand the otherwise incomprehensible notion of creation
ex nihilo, since it explained how numbers were generated out of 0 and 1.
As a new year's gift in 1697 he sent Duke Rudolf August of WolfenbutteI a
design for a medal illustrating this analogy between the binary system and the
biblical account of creation. As Aiton points out, Leibniz found in the binary
system an image of his view that "creation was continuous, in the sense that
God conserves created monads and produces them continuously by a kind of
emanation, as we produce our thoughts.,,244 How much this sounds like van
Helmont will become increasingly apparent.
   In subsequent passages van Helmont goes on to say that matter is not
really a substance, only a modification of an originally spiritual substance. He
describes matter as "sluggish," "dead," "contracted," or "asleep," adjectives
which were also used to describe matter in the notes Leibniz took of his
conversations with von Rosenroth:

   Matter, as such, is not a spirit; but only that very substance itself, which
   appears under the form of matter in its blindness, dull rest, and privation
   of its former happiness, that was in some time past a spirit and as yet is
   fundamentally and radically such and will some time hereafter be such
   again formally... I would maintain that matter is made from the joining
   together of sluggish spiritual monads ... Indeed, no single positive term
   should ... enter into a definition ofthis matter. 245

Because matter results from "privation," which van Helmont metaphorically
describes as "death," it really cannot be said to exist. For him this is the
ultimate answer to materialism and atheism. Since the only truly existing
realities are God and spirits, there is no basis upon which one can argue for
either materialism or atheism: "Matter, strictly considered, not only does not
exist in itself but does not exist positively but as privation, just as darkness,
rest, etc.,,246 When it comes to describing the process of creation, van Helmont employs the kabbalistic doctrine of emanation, adding something of an
alchemical twist - one must remember that alchemy is an essentially gnostic
doctrine247 - for he envisions emanation in terms of the process of separation,
one of the key alchemical processes. He makes the further interesting point
that the various monads change their condition either by "contraction," which
he describes metaphorically as "sleep" or "death," or by "awakening":
88       Chapter Four

     We do not admit that the divine essence ... may be divided, but we respect
     its unity exceedingly. Just as, for example, in a very clear spring, when
     some earthy and rocky particles lie hidden and later those particles separate
     and become solid, no one says that the spring is divided into pebbles but
     that the pebbles are separated. Thus, the Creator first produces an infinite
     myriad of spirits, united in this highest, most happy grade of perfection
     ... so that God is all in all. But, then, having made judgments according
     to various degrees, the separation of these things is made, as many grades
     as thoughts, to the extremist point, which is the privation of him, namely
     death, which will be brought back [to God] again at some time ... These
     particles, out of which the material world is made, cannot be said to be of
     the divine essence, but of that nature which had been produced, constituted,
     created, and set apart by the divine essence. The contraction can be called a
     sleep ... or death. And the awakening ... which is called by us the separation
     of the sparks, has so many degrees of ascent as of descent. The extremes
     which are nothl~r but the furthest opposition to God in the state of death
     and the highest union with God (unity is impossible) ... 248
There are many startling ideas in these passages which appear to me to fit
extremely well with Leibniz's own views about monads and matter as they
developed during the 1690s. Leibniz essentially rationalizes van Helmont's
metaphors. Instead of characterizing matter in terms of "blindness," "dullness," "sleep," or "death," he translates the basic idea behind all these nouns
- namely that matter represents a state of privation - into a more readily acceptable philosophical vocabulary. Monads are "unified" and "active."
They have "perception," and can "think;" whereas matter is "passive," "inert,"
"impenetrable," and bereft of thought. Wilson made much the same point
when she suggested that Cudworth's description of the "Energie of Nature"
as "obscure," "drowsie," and "unawakened" influenced Leibniz's evolving
conception of monads. But I would argue that van Helmont was the more
important and more direct influence.
   While in some passages Leibniz appears to separate monads from matter,
in others he seems to collapse the two into one entity, suggesting that all
substances are essentially both active and passive, their activity being designated under the rubric of monad, their passivity under that of matter. This is
what leads Garber and others to argue that Leibniz moved from a realist to a
phenomenalist position. An example of the first and supposedly realist way
of looking at matter appears in a letter to Burnett, which Gerhardt thinks was
written in 1699:
  In bodies I distinguish corporeal substance from matter, and I distinguish
  primary matter from secondary. Secondary matter is an aggregate composed of many corporeal substances, just as a herd is composed of many
                                            The Kabbalah and Monads          89

  animals. But each animal and each plant is also a corporeal substance,
  having in itselfthe principle of unity, which makes it truly a substance, and
  not an aggregate. And this principle of unity is that which one calls a soul
  or indeed something analogous to a soul. But leaving aside the principle of
  unity, the corporeal substance has its mass or its secondary m,atter, which is
  again an aggregate of smaller corporeal substances, and this goes to infinity. However, primitive matter or matter considered in itself is that which
  one conceives to be in bodies when all principles of unity are put aside,
  that is, that which is passive from which arises two qualities: resistance
  and inertia. 249
While Garber takes this passage as an example of Leibniz's continuing commitment to Aristotelian realism,250 I see implicit in it the gnostic and Helmontian view that matter strictly speaking is merely privation. As I mentioned earlier, Garber admits that many of the passages he cites to support
Aristotelian realism could be given an idealist or phenomenalist interpretation. And as I proposed earlier, this either/or approach misses the mark.
Viewing Leibniz's theory of matter in terms of a gnostic theory of emanation
resolves the problem, for in that case spirit and matter are simply extremes
on a continuum and Leibniz does not move from Aristotelian realism to phenomenalism but from an essentially dualisic position to a monistic one. This
is the way I would interpret the following statement from an earlier letter to
Burnett, rather than taking it as Garber does as a sign of Leibniz's continued
commitment to the Aristotelian distinction between matter and form:
   My opinion is thus that matter is only something essentially passive.
  Thought and even action cannot be modes of it, but only of the complete
  corporeal substance, which is completely constituted by two constituents,
  the active principle, and the passive principle, the former of which is called
  form, soul, entelechy, primitive force, and the second called primary matter,
  solidity, resistance. 25I
In my view there is no basic difference between these two passages and the
following one from a letter to De VoIder (20 June 1703), which Wilson, for
example, regards as phenomenalistic: 252
  I regard substance itself, being endowed with primary active and passive
  power, as an indivisible or perfect monad - like the ego, or something
  similar to it - but I do not so regard the derivative forces, which are found
  to be changing continuously. But if there were no true one, then every true
  being would be eliminated. The forces which arise from mass and velocity
  are derivative and belong to aggregates or phenomena. When I speak of
  a primitive force as enduring, I do not mean the conservation of the total
  motive power, which we discussed together earlier, but an entelechy which
90    Chapter Four
  always expresses this total force as well as other things. Derivative forces
  are in fact nothing but the modifications and echoes of primitive forces.
     So you see, esteemed Sir, that corporeal substances cannot be constituted
  solely out of derivative forces combined with their resistance, that is, out
  of vanishing modifications. Every modification presupposes something
  permanent. Therefore when you say, "Let us assume that there is nothing
  in bodies but derivative forces," I reply that such a hypothesis is impossible
  and that it again gives rise to the error of taking incomplete notions for the
  completely determined concepts of things.
     I do not admit any action of substances upon each other in the proper
  sense, since no reason can be found for one monad influencing another. But
  in appearances composed of aggregates, which are certainly nothing but
  phenomena (though well founded and regulated), no one will deny collision
  and impact. Meanwhile I discover that it is further true in phenomena and
  derivative forces that masses do not so much give new force to other masses
  as they give determinate direction to the force already existing in them, so
  that one body is 'repelled away from another by its own force rather than
  being propelled by the other...
     If you think of mass as an aggregate containing many substances, you
  can still conceive of a single pre-eminent substance or primary entelechy
  in it. For the rest; I arrange in the monad or the simple substance, complete
  with an entelechy, only one primitive passive force which is related to the
  whole mass of the organic body. The other subordinate monads placed
  in the organs do not make up a part of it, though they are immediately
  required by it, and they combine with the primary monad to make the
  organic corporeal substance, or the animal or plant. I therefore distinguish:
  1) the primitive entelechy or soul; 2) primary matter or primitive passive
  power; 3) the complete monad formed by these two; 4) mass or secondary
  matter, or the organic machine in which innumerable subordinate monads
  concur; and 5) the animal or corporeal substance which the dominating
  monad makes into one machine. 253

   Sympathizing with the confusion that De VoIder experienced reading passages like this, L. J. Russell comments:

  entelechy, materia prima, materia secunda: vis primitiva, being modified
  by materia prima and producing complete substance or materia secunda
  which possesses vis derivativa and motion: while yet entelechy develops
  by itself independently of materia secunda and materia secunda develops
  independently of entelechy, and yet entelechy acts on materia secunda and
  is the source of the mass and the forces in it - how on earth can we get all
  this into one consistent picture? 254
                                              The Kabbalah and Monads            91

My answer would be that this apparent confusion makes sense if viewed
from a kabbalistic perspective. Is the following statement by Leibniz really
so different from the one made by van Helmont and quoted above, in which
he denies that matter "strictly considered ... exists in itself'?
  Indeed I do not take away body, but I reduce it to what it is, for I show
  that corporeal mass which is believed to have something beyond simple
  substances is not a substance but a phenomenon resulting from simple
  substances which alone have unity and absolute reality.255
From 1698 on Leibniz makes many similar statements in both his correspondence and published writings. I quote a number of them to substantiate my
claim that Leibniz's conception of matter as the "passive" aspect of "active"
substance is very like van Helmont's, only stated in more philosophically
acceptable terms. For example, in a letter to Johann Bernoulli (18 November
1698) Leibniz writes:
  When I say that primary matter is that which is merely passive and separated
  from souls or forms, I said the same thing twice, for it would be the
  same if I had said that it is merely passive and separate from all activity.
  Forms are for me nothing but activities or entelechies, and substantial
  forms are the primary entelechies. I have prefered to say that the active is
  incomplete without the passive, and the passive without the active, rather
  than to speak of matter without form and form without matter, in order to
  use terms already explained rather than terms still to be explained - and
  also somehow to apply your advice before you give it, for our modems
  will poplularly take less offense at the term "activities" than at that of
  "forms. ,,256
A monistic view comes out even more clearly in a later paragraph from the
same letter:
  You are ... entirely right in thinking that all the bodies in the world arise from
  an interaction of internal forces, and I have no doubt that these forces are
  coeval with matter itself, for I believe that matter cannot subsist in itself
  without forces. I think, nevertheless, that primary or living entelechies
  are different from dead forces, which themselves probably arise from
  living forces, as is apparent when a centrifugal tendency, which must be
  considered a dead force, arises from the living force causing rotation. 257
In May, 1699 Leibniz writes in a similar vein to De VoIder, stressing the idea
that a complete body consists of both active and passive elements:
  Thus the resistence of matter contains two factors: impenetrability, or antitypy, and resistance, or inertia. And since these two factors are everywhere
  equal in a body or are proportional to its extension, it is in them that I
92       Chapter Four

     locate the nature of the passive principle or of matter, even as I recognize,
     in the active force which exerts itself in various ways through motion, the
     primitive entelechy or, in a word, something analogous to the soul, whose
     nature consists in a certain perpetual law of the same series of changes
     through which it runs unhindered. We cannot dispense with this active
     principle or ground of activity, for accidental or changing active forces
     and their motions are themselves certain modifications of some substantial
     thing, but forces and actions cannot be modifications of a merely passive
     thing such as matter. It follows, therefore, that there is a primary active or
     substantial being which is modified by an added disposition of matter or
     of passivity. Hence secondary or motive forces and motion itself must be
     ascribed to a secondary matter or to the complete body which results from
     the active and the passive together. 258
Statements such as these led up to the famous letter to De VoIder (30 June
1704), which is cited as evidence for Leibniz's phenomenalism:
  Accurately speaking, however, matter is not composed of these constitutive
  unities but results from them, since matter or extended mass is nothing but
  a phenomenon grounded in things, like the rainbow or mock-sun, and all
  reality belongs only to unities. Phenomena can therefore always be divided
  into lesser phenomena which could be observed by other, more subtle,
  animals, and we can never arrive at the smallest phenomena. Substantial
  unities are not parts but foundations of phenomena. 259
In my opinion it is more useful to think of statements like this in the context of gnostic emanation theories than in terms of the modem distinction
between realism and phenomenalism. Without mentioning a gnostic source,
Ross suggests as much:
  Form and matter represent... two complementary aspects. A monad is a
  form or spirit in so far as it is spontaneous, active and purposeful; it belongs
  to the realm of material bodies in so far as it is accommodated to the actions
  of other substances through the laws of mechanics. For all created beings,
  the bodily dimension is inescapable. Without it, they would be wholly
  active and perfect, which is a privilege reserved for God alone. 26o
Gnostic and especially kabbalistic theories that the world was created through
emanation and exists as a plenum fit extremely well with Leibniz's concept
of infinity and infinitesimals. As he wrote in Reflections on the Doctrine of a
Single Universal Spirit (1702):
  It is ... known that there are degrees in all things. There is an infinity of
  degrees between motions of any kind whatever and perfect rest, between
  hardness and perfect fluidity without any resistance, between God and
                                             The Kabbalah and Monads          93

  nothing. Thus there is likewise an infinity of degrees between an active
  being as great as it can be and pure passivity. It is unreasonable, therefore,
  to recognize only a single active being, that is, a universal spirit, and a
  single passive one, that is matter. 261
Thus, in the Monadology he envisions monads existing within this infinite
continuum, differentiated solely by the clarity of their perceptions:
  [60] ... Monads are limited, not as to their objects, but with respect to the
  modifications of their knowledge of them. Monads all go confu~edly to
  infinity, to the whole; but they are limited and differentiated by the degrees
  of their distinct perceptions. 262
The idea of continuity was a basic aspect of gnostic conceptions of a plenum,
as was the idea that matter is a limit defined as a privation of spirit. This
seems to me to be the position that Leibniz takes from the late 1690s - after
his prolonged contact with van Helmont - to the end of his life, and it is the
position which appears in the Monadology:
   [47] Thus God alone is the primitive unity or the first [originaire] simple
   substance; all created or derivative monads are products, and are generated
   so to speak, by continual fulgurations of the divinity from moment to
   moment, limited by the receptivity of the creature, to which it is essential
   to be limited. 263
Created souls or monads are inseparable from bodies in as much as bodies
represent the limitation distinguishing creatures from their creator. Thus,
towards the end of his life Leibniz can make the startling statement - startling
in a Christian context - that imperfection is part of the very nature of being a
creature and precedes sin: "there is an original imperfection in the creature
before sin, because the creature is limited in its essence; whence ensues that
it cannot know all, and that it can deceive itself and cemmit other errors.,,264
This is not a view that fits with orthodox Christian notions of original sin and
individual accountability; it is, however, a perfectly acceptable gnostic and
neoplatonic view and one which lays the basis for the optimism of Leibniz's
theodicy.
    The idea that monads are created from "fulgurations" of divine light which
are limited to their individual capacities brings to mind the first point that
Leibniz noted down from his reading of the Kabbala Denudata, namely that
"the infinite being consists in an indivisible point and the emanated light, or
the sphere of activity, sends forth its light at its pleasure." It also brings to
mind a doctrine central to the Kabbalah in the Lurianic form propagated by
van Helmont, namely "the breaking of the vessels." According to this my thopoetic concept, the divine light was too powerful to be contained by the
"vessels," or spiritual substances originally created by God; their shattering
94     Chapter Four

resulted in the creation of matter proper when sparks oflight "fell" and became
emeshed in the "shards" or "husks" of the broken vessels. I will come back
to this Lurianic doctrine in the chapter on freedom and determinism.
   In the Doctrine of a Single Universal Spirit (1702) Leibniz combines the
gnostic idea of a plenum with the kabbalistic idea that bodies originate from
seeds which contract and expand as they become more or less material. He
offers scientific proof for both these ideas in terms of microscopic observations and the theory of preformation:

   ... I see no reason, either religious or philosophical, which compels me to
   abandon the doctrine of the parallelism of soul and body and to admit a
   perfect separation. For why cannot the soul always retain a subtle body
   organized after its own manner, which could even some day reassume
   the form of its visible body in the resurrection, since a glorified body is
   ascribed to the blessed, and since the ancient Fathers have ascribed a subtle
   body to angels?
       Furthermore, this doctrine conforms with the order of nature established
  through experience, for the observations of very capable observers have
  convinced us that animals do not begin when they are popularly believed
  to begin and that seminal animals or living seeds have existed from the
  beginning of things. And both order and reason demand that what has
  existed since the beginning should no more have an end and that, since
  generation is thus merely the growth of a changed and developed animal,
  death will be nothing but the diminution of a changed and developed
  animal but that the animal itself will always remain throughout these
  transformations, just as the silkworm and the butterfly are one and the
  same animal. And it is appropriate to remark here that nature has this
  tact and goodness in revealing its secrets to us in small samples and thus
  making us infer the rest, everything being in correspondence and harmony.
  It is this which nature shows us in the transformation of caterpillars and
  other insects, for flies too come from worms, to help us grasp that there are
  transformations everywhere. Our experiments on insects have destroyed
  the popular notion than these animals are reproduced through nourishment,
  without propagation. Nature has likewise also given us, in birds, a sample
  of how all animals are generated by means of eggs, a fact which the new
  discoveries have now made us accept.
       There are also microscopic observations which have shown that the
  butterfly is merely a development of the caterpillar, but especially that
  seeds already contain the formed plant or animal, although it still needs
  transformation and nourishment, or growth, to become an animal of the
  kind which our ordinary senses can observe. And since even the smallest
  insects reproduce by the propagation of their kind, one must conclude the
                                             The Kabbalah and Monads          95

  same to be true for these little seminal animals, that is, that they themselves
  come from other still smaller seminal animals, and thus have originated
  only with the world. This agrees well with the Holy Scripture, which
  suggests that there were seeds in the beginning.265

Leibniz's suggestion that monads can experience "diminution" or "development" is very like van Helmont's idea that monads "contract" or "sleep" and
"awaken." The reference to "seeds" as the origin of all things appears in
Thoughts on Genesis, as we saw earlier.
   Both Aiton and Brown suggest that the alchemical belief that every substance contains a seminal core or "flower," which can be reconstituted even
from ashes, fits nicely with this way of thinking and could have influenced
Leibniz in the formulation of his Monadology. One could go farther and
suggest that alchemical assumptions were an important source for Leibniz's
monadology since Leibniz was himself an alchemist and fully cognizant of
the alchemical view.of matter and spirit as two aspects of a single thing - an
idea embedded in Leibniz's concept of monads as having a "passive" and an
"acti ve" component. Perhaps the most famous alchemical treatise ever written
was the Emerald Table, one of the 36,000 texts supposedly written by Hermes
Trismegistus, or "thrice-great Hermes," the legendary founder of the art (his
portrait can be found in good Christian company on the beautifully inlaid
floors of the cathedral in Sienna). The basic message of the Emerald Table,
an enigmatically brief document containing thirteen gnomic precepts, is that
all things emerge from one originally divine and spiritual nature. To quote
the second precept: "What is below is like that which is above, and what is
above is like that which is below, to accomplish the miracles of one thing.,,266
This basic world view was enshrined in the alchemical motto "All in One" or
"One in All," which was ceaselessly repeated and symbolized by the gnostic
symbols of an egg or the tail-eating serpent (ouroboros).267 The two alchemical processes that intrigued alchemists the most and offered tangible proof
for their gnostic view that matter was essentially spirit were distillation and
sublimation. Alchemists themselves were more likely to designate these procedures "rarefaction," "exhaltation," or "condensation," which indicates their
tendency to interpret them from a gnostic perspective. These two processes
convinced them that matter could be refined and brought back to its originally
pure spiritual state. 268 But there is one single source for all these variations
on the single theme of the convertibility of spirit and matter: Francis Mercury
van Helmont. Van Helmont was a practicing alchemist and he was a Lurianic
Kabbalist, but he was also the disciple of his father. The elder van Helmont
was an alchemist and a vitalist, who advocated a form of Aristotelian monism
which has great affinities with the kabbalistic theories of his son. It also has
astonishing similarities to Leibniz's mature monadology.
96     Chapter Four

    The similarities between Leibniz's monads and J. B. van Helmont's concept of substance have been pointed out by Walter Pagel. For the elder van
Helmont spirit and matter are "the two convertible faces of the same coin, the
individual unit, in which they are inseparably interwoven. The spirit is not
additional but intrinsic to the body of the object. ,,269 Leibniz notion of a monad as containing "active" and "passive" forces is extraordinarily similar; the
only real difference is in terminology. Pagel has shown how van Helmont's
discovery of "gas" contributed to his monistic view of the inseparability of
form and matter. J. B. van Helmont considered the gas released by a substance
its pure essence, freed from the coarse material "husks" that had coagulated
around it. The very use of the word "husk" is suggestive for its similarity
with the Lurianic doctrine of "the breaking of the vessels." Pagel argues that
the elder van Helmont's discovery of gas convinced him that there was an
intrinsic force in matter that was inseparable from it. He describes this in a
way that reveals the common ideas linking the philosophy of the elder van
Helmont with both the Lurianic Kabbalah and Leibniz's monadology:

   If Aristotle's realisation of perfection (entelecheia) stood for the driving
   force that is intrinsic and specific to an individual object, this likewise epitomises van Helmont's main tenet, namely that the object is not composed of
   "form" superadded to "matter," but that "form" is the force intrinsic to and
   inseparable from "matter." Neither has any precedence: primacy is instead
   attributed to the individual unit, in van Helmont's terms matter specifically
   "disposed." This he found empirically confirmed by his attempt at making
   visible the essential kernel of an object. It appared to be demonstrable
   in the test-tube, per ignem, by burning away the object's coarse material
   "husks." What remained was a smoke with paricular object-specific properties. This was the gas of the object, or, rather, the object itself divested
   of deceptive shapes and coverings and reduced to its pure essence. Van
   Helmont believed he had by chemical manipulation penetrated to the prime
   ens of the object, its seminal essence; that is, its entelecheia. 27o

Following Aristotle, the elder van Helmont believed that there was a principle
within each material object that determined its life history. Aristotle had called
this the "form." Borrowing from the vocabulary of Paracelsus, van Helmont
preferred the term archeus:

  the seminal efficient cause containeth the Types or Patterns of things to be
  done by itself, the figure, motions, houre, respects, inclinations, fitnesses,
  equalizings, proportions, alienation, defect, and whatsoever falls in under
  the succession of dayes, as well as in the business of generation, as of
  government. 271
                                              The Kabbalah and Monads          97
The similarity ofthis idea with Leibniz's notion of monads as completely selfmotiviating hardly needs to be stressed. But it is worth pointing out that in
appropriating the term archeus from Paracelsus, van Helmont followed him in
thinking that complex organisms like the human body contained many archei,
one for each organ, distinct part, or limb. In describing how this worked in
practice both van Helmont and Paracelsus used the analogy of soldiers under
a general. Leibniz used similar analogies to descibe the relationship between
the innumerable monads within a single organism.
   There is another way in which the elder van Helmont may have influenced
Leibniz. Van Helmont rejected the common view of time as a continuum of
infinite indivisible moments or points of duration on the grounds that infinity is
incompatible with indivisibility. In his view time was not an absolute concept.
It was relative and intrinsic to each individual. Van Helmont consequently
arrived at the idea of "biological time," which proved so fruitful for later
biologists. 272 Leibniz's view of time as relative is remarkably similar.
   Leibniz developed his concept of monads over a long period and he drew
from many sources, from alchemical notions about "seeds" and the "flower" of substances, from neoplatonic and kabbalistic theories of emanation,
and from J. B. van Helmont's concept of the archeus. It took the genius
of Leibniz to transform these my tho-poetic insights into an extraordinarily
daring metaphysical physics that defied the comprehension of even his most
intellectually able contemporaries. 273 At the very beginning of his book on
Leibniz, G. MacDonald Ross stresses how radical Leibniz's ideas are, so
radical in fact that they have only really been understood in the twentieth century. By reducing matter to a complex of forces Leibniz anticipated modem
physics:
  Leibniz saw that if the only function of matter was as a passive carrier of
  forces, then it had no role to play in scientific explanation. Its only role
  would be the metaphysical one of satisfying the prejudice that forces must
  inhere in something more substantial than themselves. He maintained that
  matter was nothing other than the receptive capacity of things, or their
  "passive power," as he called it. Matter just was the capacity to slow other
  things down, and to be accelerated rather than penetrated (capacities which
  ghosts and shadows lack) - in other words, inertia or mass, and solidity. So,
  taking also into account "active powers" such as kinetic energy, Leibniz
  reduced matter to a complex of forces. In this he was anticipating modem
  field theory, which treats material particles as concentrated fields of force
  - an anticipation duly recognized by its founder, the Italian mathematician
  Ruggiero Giuseppe Boscovich (1711-87).274
I am not arguing that the younger van Helmont was Leibniz's intellectual equal
or even that his influence was paramount in the development of Leibniz's
98    Chapter Four

monadology, but the assembled evidence surely suggests that van Helmont's
ideas must be taken into consideration in any account that claims to describe
the development of Leibniz's mature monadology.
                                CHAPTER FIVE

         The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism

The problem of individuality and freedom within a larger framework of order
and stability was a basic issue in the seventeenth century.275 Although Leibniz
tried to carve out an area of freedom for the individual in his philosophy, most
of his contemporaries as well as his critics (right up to the present) agree that
he failed. 276 That he started out a determinist seems fairly clear from the
letter he wrote to Magnus Wedderkopf in May, 1671, succinctly analyzing
the dilemma involved in arguing either way:
  Fate is the decree of God or the necessity of events. Those events are fatal
  which will necessarily happen. Both views are difficult - that a God who
  does not decide everything, or that a God who does decide everything,
  should be the absolute author of all. For if he does decide everything, and
  the world dissents from his decree, he will not be omnipotent. But if he
  does not decide everything, it seems to follow that he is not omniscient.
  For it seems impossible that he should suspend his omniscient judgment
  about anything. If we frequently suspend our jUdgments, this happens out
  of ignorance. Hence it follows that God can never be purely permissive.
  It follows also that there is no decree of God which is really not absolute.
  For we suspend our judgments with conditions and alternatives because
  we have insufficiently explored the circumstances of the problem.
      Is this conclusion hard? I admit it. What of it? Pilate is condemned.
  Why? Because he lacks faith. Why does he lack it? Because he lacks the
  will to attention. Why this? Because he has not understood the necessity
  of the matter (the utility of attending to it). Why has he not understood
  it? Because the causes of understanding were lacking. For it is necessary to refer everything to some first cause - or it must be admitted that
  something can exist without a sufficient reason for its existence, and this
  admission destroys the demonstration of the existence of God and of many
  philosophical theorems ...
     But this is said to you; I should not like to have it get abroad. For not
  even the most accurate remarks are understood by everyone. 277

100    Chapter Five

The last two sentences reveal Leibniz's dissatisfaction with this position.
   In the years between this letter and the writing of the Discourse, Leibniz
tried to modify his view but without success. Arnauld's horrified reaction to
what he considered "a more than fatal necessity" in the Discourse, forced
Leibniz to rethink the issue. 278 A note Leibniz wrote on the copy of the letter
to Wedderkopf at a later date shows that he thought he had solved the problem
by distinguishing between contingent and necessary truths: "I later corrected
this, for it is one thing for sins to happen infallibly, another for them to happen
necessarily.,,279 But most critics are not as happy with Leibniz's solution as
he apparently was and reject this distinction as meaningless.
   Whatever the inadequacies of Leibniz's philosophical position on the issue
of freedom, it is obvious that Leibniz could not stomach determinism or
the fatalism it engendered. The hours he spent with van Helmont devising
practical projects to improve social and working conditions and to help the
poor and sick are not the work of a fatalist or even of a stoic, the position
Ross thinks he eventually embraced. 28o Around the same time he wrote the
letter to Wedderkopf, Leibniz wrote the following passage advocating a kind
of activism which is totally inconsistent with his philosophical position at this
point:
  ... those who appraise this matter truly understand that the sciences of the
  just and the useful, that is of the public good and of their own private good,
  are mutually tied up in each other and that no one can easily be happy in
  the midst of miserable people.281
Throughout his life Leibniz criticized any group or individual turning away
from an active life to one of pious resignation. This is an important aspect of
his criticisms ofIslam282 and Quietism. Even in the Discourse, the abridgment
of which so troubled Arnauld on account of its determinism, he makes the
point that one must do good works at all costs:
  [4] ... I hold ... that... in order to act in accordance with the love of God,
  it is not sufficient to force ourselves to be patient;- rather, we must truly
  be satisfied with everything that has come to us according to his will. I
  mean this acquiescence with respect to the past. As for the future, we
  must not be quietists and stand ridiculously with arms folded, awaiting
  that which God will do, according to the sophism that the ancients called
  logon aergon, the lazy reason. But we must act in accordance with what
  we presume to be the will of God, in so far as we can judge it, trying
  with all our might to contribute to the general good and especially to the
  embellishment and perfection of that which affects us or that which is near
  us, that which is, so to speak, in our grasp. For although the outcome might
  perhaps demonstrate that God did not wish our good will to have effect at
                         The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism            101

  present, it does not follow that he did not wish us to act as we have. On
  the contrary, since he is the best of masters, he never demands more than
  the right intention, and it is for him to know the proper hour and place for
  letting the good designs succeed.
Even more surprisingly for a supposed determinist, Leibniz was well aware of
how adverse social circumstances affect an individual's behavior and actions:
  Above everything else, one must seek means of obviating public misery.
  Conscience, honor, duty and interest equally oblige me to do it. For extreme
  poverty is mother of crimes and also the source of sickness ... From which
  it follows that one must furnish the poor with the means of earning their
  livelihood, not only by using charity and [charitable] foundations to this
  end, but also by taking an interest in agriculture, by furnishing artisans
  materials and a market, by educating them to make their productions
  better, and finally by putting an end to idleness and to abusive practices in
  manufactures and commerce. 283
On the basis of this kind of reasoning it would be impossible to say that someone's character is determined at birth. In fact, Leibniz denies that character is
a given, arguing that it is formed through experience:
  Good disposition, favourable upbringing, association with pious and virtuous persons may contribute much towards ... a propitious condition for our
  souls; but most securely are they grounded therein by good principles. I
  have already said that insight must be joined to fervour, that the perfecting
  of our understanding must accomplish the perfecting of our will. The practices of virtue, as well as those of vice, may be the effect of a mere habit,
  one may acquire a taste for them; but when virtue is reasonable, when it
  is related to God, who is the supreme reason of things, it is founded on
  knowledge. 284

He gives a vivid example of twins separated at birth and subject to very different experiences to illustrate the way external circumstances shape character,
even to the point of determining who is saved and who damned .
  ... the chances to which, in spite of ourselves, we are subject, play only too
  large a part in what brings salvation to men, or removes it from them. Let
  us imagine twin Polish children, the one taken by the Tartars, sold to the
  Turks, brought to apostasy, plunged in impiety, dying in despair; the other
  saved by some chance, falling then into good hands to be educated properly,
  permeated by the soundest truths of religion, exercised in the virtues that
  it commends to us, dying with all the feelings of a good Christian. One
  will lament the misfortune of the former, prevented perhaps by a slight
102    Chapter Five

   circumstance from being saved like his brother, and one will marvel that
   this slight chance should have decided his fate for eternity.285
Leibniz rejects the possible rejoinder that God may have ordained that all this
should happen in conformity with the innate disposition of the two children,
together with the implied argument that one's situation cannot excuse one's
behavior:
   Someone will perchance say that God foresaw by mediate knowledge that
   the former would have been wicked and damned even if he had remained
   in Poland. There are perhaps conjunctures wherein something of the kind
   takes place. But will it therefore be said that this is a general rule, and that
   not one of those who were damned amongst the pagans would have been
   saved if he had been amongst Christians? Would that not be to contradict
   our Lord, who said that Tyre and Sidon would have profited better by his
   preaching, if they had had the good fortune to hear it, than Capernaum ?286
Leibniz's wide-ranging philosophical interests, not to mention his attempts
at religious conciliation, are only comprehensible on the assumption that he
believed men were free to determine and change their behavior. His lifelong work on the ars combinatoria, for example, makes absolutely no sense
unless Leibniz sincerely believed that by learning to think more clearly and
accurately, men would begin to act more rationally and consequently live
together more amicably. A passage such as the following might be interpreted
to suggest that Leibniz accepted the Stoic position that all we can do is use
our reason to understand how everything is for the best, even though we are
powerless to do anything about it; but I think it suggests much more than this,
namely that man can and must use his reason to change his life for the better:
  We are free insofar as we reason properly, and slaves insofar as we are
  mastered by the passions which come from internal impressions. But to
  reason well (you say) does not depend on us. I respond that it is in our
  power, since we have an infallible method for reasoning properly, provided
  that we wish to make use of it. It is necessary only to will. 287
A passage from his Theodicy emphasizes the point that error and even evil
are the result of confused, inaccurate thinking. There is therefore a remedy
and it lies within the power of the individual to find and use it:
  ... For there is in the soul not only an order of distinct perceptions, forming
  its dominion, but also a series of confused perceptions or passions, forming
  its bondage: and there is no need for astonishment at that; the soul would
  be a Divinity if it had none but distinct perceptions. It has nevertheless
  some power over these confused perceptions also, even if in an indirect
  manner. For although it cannot change its passions forthwith, it can work
                          The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism             103

  from afar towards that end with enough success, and endue itself with
  new passions and even habits. It even has a like power over the more
  distinct perceptions, being able to endue itself indirectly with opinions
  and intentions, and to hinder itself from having this one or that, and stay
  or hasten its judgements. For we can seek means beforehand to arrest
  ourselves, when occasion arises, on the sliding step of a rash judgment;
  we can find some incident to justify postponement of our resolution even
  at the moment when the matter appears ready to be judged. Although our
  opinion and our act of willing be not directly objects of our will (as I have
  already observed), one sometimes makes measures nevertheless to will, or
  belief, now. So great is the profundity of the spirit of man. 288

The last sentence of this quotation is especially worthy of comment, for it
echoes the optimistic view of man characteristic of Renaissance Humanists
like Pico della Mirandola. So profound is the spirit of man that he can indeed
change his destiny and improve himself! In taking this position, Leibniz
appears to accept the Platonic view that evil is basically a matter of ignorance.
It is consequently a state of privation which can be altered. The equation he
makes between evil, ignorance, and faulty apperception in the following
quotation is not what one would expect from a Lutheran, or even from an
orthodox Christian, because it so carefully avoids any mention of original sin
as the ineradicable source of man's evil deeds:

  Evil is ... like darkness, and not only ignorance but also error and malice
  consist formally in a certain kind of privation. Here is an example of error
  which we have already employed. I see a tower which from a distance
  appears round although it is square. The thought that the tower is what
  it appears to be flows naturally from that which I see; and when I dwell
  on this thought it is an affirmation, it is a false judgement; but if I pursue
  the examination, if some reflexion causes me to perceive that appearances
  deceive me, 10 and behold, I abandon my error. To abide in a certain place,
  or not to go further, not to espy some landmark, these are privations.
     It is the same in respect of malice or ill will. The will tends towards good
  in general, it must strive after the perfection that befits us, and the supreme
  perfection is in God. All pleasures have within themselves some feeling
  of perfection. But when one is limited to the pleasures of the senses, or to
  other pleasures to the detriment of greater good, as of health, of virtue, of
  union with God, of felicity, it is in this privation of a further aspiration that
  the defect consists. In general perfection is positive, it is an absolute reality;
  defect is privation, it comes from limitation and tends to new privations.
  This saying is therefore as true as it is ancient: bonum ex causa integra,
  malum ex quolibet defectu; as also that which states: malum causam habet
104    Chapter Five

   non efficientem, sed deficientem. And I hope that the meaning of these
   axioms will be better apprehended after what I have just said. 289

The manifest contradiction between what seems to be Leibniz's philosophical
position of determinism and his practical activism and belief in the human
potential for improvement seems insoluble. But I would suggest one possible
way out of this impasse. If we look at the solution proposed by van Helmont
to the same problem, we can see that the Lurianic Kabbalah provided the
basis for a truly impregnable theodicy. While Leibniz did not accept all the
 my tho-poetic details of van Helmont's Lurianic theodicy - for example, that
each individual would have twelve reincarnations (and thus ample time to
 achieve salvation) or that greater souls could be reborn in lesser ones to help
them achieve salvation - he was profoundly influenced by van Helmont's
essentially gnostic and neoplatonic view that because sin and evil originated
in privation, both could and would be eliminated as the universe was restored
to its orignal perfection. The strongest statements to this effect come from
Leibniz's Theodicy, which he wrote towards the end of his life. In my opinion,
Leibniz's exposure to the Lurianic Kabbalah was a critical factor in the
development of his increasing optimism.
   The Lurianic Kabbalah was predicated on the vision of a restored and
perfected universe. Gershom Scholem has argued that Isaac Luria (15341572) created an optimistic philosophy out of pessimistic gnostic elements
at a particularly difficult time for the Jews, during the century after their
expulsion from the Iberian peninsula. 29o In Luria's thought exile became
the preliminary stage in a drama of universal redemption in which all souls
would eventually return home to their divine creator. Luria accepted the
gnostic belief that man was in exile on earth, but unlike pessimistic, worldrenouncing Gnostics, this did not lead him to denounce the material world as
vile and worthless. On the contrary, for him spirit and matter were the ends of
a single continuum, and matter would be restored to its essentially spiritual
state by a process of restoration, known as tikkun. Though the process was
long and arduous, each material entity was allotted repeated reincarnations or
transmigrations during which it would slowly move up the spiritual ladder.
Exile was therefore a necessary, though transitory, stage in a process which
would end in universal salvation. Pain and suffering were inevitable, but
as a result of human actions in the form of tikkunim (positive redemptive
acts) every individual would eventually be purged of the "husks" or "shards"
which, according to Lurianic mythology, enveloped them when they fell from
heaven into earthly exile.
   Luria's thought is obscure. He delighted in allegories which invited a
variety of different interpretations. In describing created souls as enveloped
in "husks" or "shards," Luria elaborated on an earlier Kabbalistic doctrine
                         The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism           105

known as "the breaking of the vessels" (shevirah-ha-kelim), as I mentioned
earlier. According to this doctrine, after the creation of the primal man,
Adam Kadmon, the ten sefiroth (those attributes of the hidden God such as
knowledge, strength, justice, mercy, etc. which were revealed through the
process of emanation) burst from his face in an undifferentiated mass. This
disordered state was only temporary because creation involved the formation
of finite beings with their allotted place in the divine order. It was therefore
necessary to separate the sefiroth, which, according to Luria's mythology,
should have been kept apart in separate bowls. The lights of the first three
sefiroth were contained in bowls, but the lower sefiroth proved too strong,
and the bowls or vessels shattered.
   With "the breaking of the vessels" evil entered the world in as much as
souls became sunk in matter - or, as Luria explains more poetically - the
shards of the shattered vessels fell down and became the dregs of the material
world, trapping sparks of divine light. These sparks were the souls in exile.
The work of redemption, or restoration (tikkun), consisted in freeing these
sparks from their exiled state immersed in material prisons and reuniting them
with the divine light.
   Luria's vision of a restored and perfect universe rested on his monistic
philosophy. Luria believed that everything created is alive and full of souls
at different levels of spiritual awareness and development. One of Luria's
disciples, Hayyim Vital, explained Luria's ideas in a treatise included in the
Kabbala Denudata: "There is nothing in the world, not even among silent
things, such as dust and stones, that does not possess a certain life, spiritual
nature, a particular planet, and its perfect form in the heavens.,,291 A later
Kabbalist describes Luria's theory that souls rise up the ladder of creation,
becoming progressively more spiritual until finally freed from the cycle of
reincarnation:
   And God gradually raises these [souls] from step to step. In gilgul [reincarnation] he first brings them to life as stones, and from these as plants,
   from there as animals, and from there as pagans and slaves, and from there
   as Jews. 292
Luria concluded that for a wise and pious man even eating is a holy act, for it
enabled such a man to elevate souls by incorporating them into his own flesh.
  He who is a wise disciple and eats his food with proper attention is able
  to elevate and restore many revolving souls. Whoever is not attentive will
  not restore anything, but he will also be damaged by them. 293
Interestingly enough, the somewhat unusual ideas in these last two passages
reappear - but in a more ecumenical fashion - in van Helmont's last book,
written by Leibniz:
106    Chapter Five

   at length, by innumerable Transplantations or Removes of Deaths, Lives,
   Feedings, and Regenerations, all things might be Transported into Man, in
   and by whom they were to be Glorified. 294

What is especially significant and important about this passage - and I stress
that it was written by Leibniz - is the emphasis it places on the role of man
in the redemptive process. That human beings were entirely responsible for
redeeming the fallen world is a fundamental axiom of the Lurianic Kabbalah.
Moshe Idel has described the tremendous power accorded to man in the
Kabbalah:

    The focus of Kabbalistic theurgy is God, not man; the latter is given
   unimaginable powers to be used in order to repair the divine glory or
   the divine image; only his initiative can improve Divinity... the Jew is
   responsible for everything, including God, since his activity is crucial for
   the welfare of the cosmos. 295

Idellabels the role envisaged for man by the K~bb~lah as "universe maintenance activity. ,,296 He contrasts the kabbalistic view that God is dependent on
man with the Christian concept of man's complete dependence on God. However, it was precisely this cornerstone of Christian - and especially Lutheran
and Calvinist - belief that began crumbling in the latter part of the sixteenth
century. In this respect the Lurianic Kabbalah joined forces with a host of
other essentially Pelagian philosophies and theologies that shared a common
belief in perfectionism and in man's inherently divine nature and ability to
restore the world to its prelapsarian state. One of the so-called Hermetic
dialogues, first translated from Greek during the Renaissance by Marsilius
Ficino, presents this gnostic belief in man's essentially divine nature. In this
dialogue Nous, or the universal mind, explains to Hermes Trismegistus the
power man possess to become God:

  See what power you have, what quickness! If you can do these things, can
  god not do them? So you must think of god in this way, as having everything
  - the cosmos, himself, [the] universe -like thoughts within himself. Thus,
  unless you make yourself equal to god, you cannot understand god; like
  is understood by like. Make yourself grow to immeasurable immensity,
  outleap all body, outstrip all time, become eternity and you will understand
  god. Having conceived that nothing is impossible to you, consider yourself
  immortal and able to understand everything, all art, all learning, the temper
  of every living thing. Go higher than every height and lower than every
  depth. Collect in yourself all the sensations of what has been made, of
  fire and water, dry and wet; be everywhere at once, on land, in the sea,
  in heaven; be not yet born, be in the womb, be young, old, dead, beyond
                        The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism           107

  death. And when you have understood all these at once - times, places,
  things, qualities, quantities - then you can understand god. 297
Passages such as this one from the Hermetic dialogues led Pico della Mirandola to write his Oration on the Dignity of Man, in which he emphasized
man's protean nature and his ability to become anything he wished, including
divine. This optimistic view of man's inherent power and divinity clearly
clashed with the Christian doctrine of original sin and emphasis on man's
fallen nature.
   Alchemists - and one must remember that Hermes Trismegistus was the
reputed founder of the art, which is why alchemists were called "Hermeticists"
- strayed even farther from the path of Christian orthodoxy. Accepting the
doctrine that man is the microcosm who contains the whole of creation, or the
macrocosm, within himself, they came to believe that the alchemist possessed
the power to save the world as well as himself. The alchemist thus assumed the
role of a gnostic savior. The notorious sixteenth century occultist Cornelius
Agrippa reveals the logic behind this assumption:
  ... no one can reach perfection in the art without having recognized its principles within himself, indeed, the more each man understands himself, the
  greater the power of attraction he attains, the greater and more wonderful
  the work he does, and he rises to such perfection that he becomes a Son of
  God, and is transmuted into the image of God, and is united with him in
  a way which is granted neither to angels, nor the world, nor any creature
  save only man himself; in short, he can become a Son of God, and united
  with God. And moreover, when man is united with God, everything in that
  man is also united with the divine - firstly his mind then his spirit and
  his animal faculties, his vegetative faculty and the elements, right down to
  matt~r; indeed, he draws with him even the body, whose shape remains,
  transferring it to a better destiny and a celestial nature, so that it may be
  glorified in immortality; and this gift, as we have just mentioned, is peculiar to man, for whom the glory of being made in God's image is truly his
  own, and not shared with any other creature. 298
This grandiose view of man's role in the universe was encouraged by the parallel alchemists drew between the philosopher's stone and Christ and by their
conviction that both were in man. "Christ, that most noble cornerstone, is in
us," wrote Robert Fludd. 299 The author of the Sophie Hydrolith is more expansive: "The earthly philosopher's stone is the true image of the real spiritual
and heavenly stone, Jesus Christ.,,3oo Herman Kopp, the nineteenth-century
historian of alchemy, was scandalized by the drawn out parallel between
Christ and the philosopher's stone which took up more than fifty pages of
Wasserstein der Weysen. 301 Alchemists were essentially a fifth column within
108    Chapter Five

 the various Christian denominations (and they were in all of them).302 They
 carried forward the optimistic ideas of Renaissance Humanists into the age of
 Enlightenment. The gnostic conviction that man was a spark of divinity which
 had fallen into the world of matter with the power to regenerate himself and
 the world around him was an idea that simply could not be erradicated. As an
 idea it acted in much the same way the philosopher's stone was thought to act,
 like yeast, starting as a speck or grain but gradually transmutating whatever
 it touched. Nurtured by alchemists and mystics during the dark, pessimistic
period of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation, this optimistic belief in
human potential reached its full development during the Enlightenment and
has provided the rationale for liberal and progressive thinking ever since.
     It is important to keep this optimistic, alchemical view of man in mind in
connection with Leibniz's assessment of human nature. For Leibniz was an
 alchemist and he was well acquainted with all the radical ideologies stemming
from the Renaissance combination of alchemical, neoplatonic, and kabbalistic thought. Frances Yates describes this mix as "Rosicrucian." She suggested
that the word "Rosicrucian" should enter the vocabulary of serious historians
to describe the kind of activist, reforming mentality that paved the way for
modem science. 303 The so-called "Yates Thesis" ran into a barrage of criticism. The idea that good science could come out of bad occultism clearly
affronted some scholars. 304 But Yates' hunches have proved to have more
substance than her detractors could have imagined. Mounting evidence has
shown that the progressive ideas of major scientific thinkers from Bacon to
Newton were influenced by occult and especially alchemical theories, and
Leibniz was one of these. 305 The rumor that Leibniz joined a "Rosicrucian"
society in Niirnberg has been discounted by Ross. 306 But as Yates pointed
out, Andreae (who, if he did not write the Rosicrucian manifestos himself,
was closely connected with them) attempted to organize a "Societas Christiana" along Rosicrucian lines in Niirnberg in 1628. This may have been the
society Leibniz joined in 1663. The rules for Leibniz's own Order of Charity,
which he formulated many years later, have a great deal in common with the
Rosicrucian manifestos. 307
    The development of a more optimistic attitude toward man and the universe during the latter half of the seventeenth century can be seen from the
increasing disenchantment with the idea of predestination and eternal damnation, even among Protestants. A growing number of people rejected the idea
that a just and merciful God could damn any of his creatures eternally, arguing
instead that he would punish them simply and solely to ensure their eventual
salvation. Van Helmont went so far as to argue that the very idea of original
sin and eternal damnation turned people against Christianity and promoted
atheism:
                        The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism            109

  ... many Doctrines maintained by some Christians, concerning Reprobation,
  Original Sin, Infinite Damnation and the like, do give great occasion to
  many... to suspect the whole Doctrine is false, and many of them do bless
  themselves from the God of the Christians, as being not the true God, but
  an Idol of their own making, whom they have so shaped and framed after
  their own dark and foolish imaginations. 308
By the end of his life Leibniz became equally dismayed by the extreme
emphasis on God's will and power to the exclusion of justice and mercy. In
his Theodicy he criticizes those who,
  convinced that nothing comes to pass save by the will and the power of
  God, ascribe to him intentions and actions so unworthy of the greatest
  and the best of all beings that one would say these authors have indeed
  renounced the dogma which recognizes God's justice and goodness. They
  thought that, being supreme Master of the universe, he could without any
  detriment to his holiness cause sins to be committed, simply at his will and
  pleasure, or in order that he might have the pleasure of punishing; and even
  that he could take pleasure in eternally afflicting innocent people without
  doing any injustice, because no one has the right or the power to control his
  actions. Some even have gone so far as to say that God acts thus indeed;
  and on the plea that we are as nothing in comparison with him, they liken
  us to earthworms which men crush without heeding as they walk, or in
  general to animals that are not of our species and which we do not scruple
  to ill-treat.
     I believe that many persons otherwise of good intentions are misled
  by these ideas, because they have not sufficient knowledge of their consequences. They do not see that, properly speaking, God's justice is thus
  overthrown. For what idea shall we form of such a justice as has only will
  for its rule, that is to say, where the will is not guided by the rules of good
  and even tends directly towards evil?309
The revival of the idea of apocatastasis, or universal salvation, associated
originally with Origen (and for which he was anathematized at the Council of Constantinople in 553 C. E.) was another important indication of a
move in the direction of Enlightenment tolerance. It should come as no surprise that Leibniz joined ranks with the optimistic and progressive thinkers
who revived Origen's view that man had the innate, God-given capacity
and will to ensure his own salvation. 310 As Michel Fichant has shown in
his important edition of several virtually unknown manuscripts, Leibniz
not only came to accept Origen's theory of apocatastasis, but he actively
promoted the dissemination of this theory.3l1 Over a period of twenty-six
years, between 1693 when Leibniz wrote the first treatise entitled Concern110    Chapter Five

 ing the Horizon of Human Knowledge 312 and 1715 when he wrote two short
 pieces entitled' A7roK,caaafaau:; 7ra//rw// (The Universal Restitution) and
 'A7roK,araafaaL(, (Restitution), Leibniz radically altered his views. Having
 initially accepted the idea of apocatastasis in the pre-Origen and primarily
 Stoic sense that this world and everything in it was bound to return again and
 again in endless cycles of repetition, Leibniz came to embrace Origen's wholly different and optimistic interpretation of apocatastasis as the inevitable
 restitution of the fallen world to it prelapsarian perfection. Although Fichant
 recognizes the significant change in Leibniz's thinking from the first treatise to the last two, he nevertheless argues for their basic continuity on the
 grounds that, although he may not have quite realized it initially, Leibniz's
 own philosophical principles precluded the kind of determinism accepted
by the Stoics. 313 As I will argue in the next chapter, I do not believe that
Leibniz's acute sense of logic motivated him to change his views as much
 as van Helmont. The dates of the three treatises seem to me to be crucial
 in this respect: the first was written before van Helmont and Leibniz's most
 intense period of friendship and collaboration, the last two well after it. As I
 show in the following chapter, the years between 1694 and 1697 was decisive
in laying the foundations for Leibniz's mature and to my mind successful,
though unorthodox, theodicy. During these years, and as the direct result of
van Helmont's influence, Leibniz wrestled with the question of whether this
world in its present condition was really the best of all possible worlds or
if it could improve. He eventually decided that progress was inevitable and
indeed essential if God's ways were to be justified. I do not believe that
Leibniz arrived at this conclusion through logic. As in all other areas of his
thought metaphysics and theology were his guiding lights.
    The belief that everyone and everything would eventually be restored to
its prelapsarian state represented a revival of the Renaissance view of man
as a miraculous hybrid creature who possessed the power to be anything
he wished, including God, a view that carried over in a somewhat modified
but still heady form into the following period of the Enlightenment. This
essentially heretical doctrine made a startling and somewhat paradoxical
come-back in a century which began with the pessimist conviction that the
world was in an unalterable state of decline and ended with an almost fatuous
optimism. Alchemists, Hermeticists, Kabbalists, and radical sectarians of
all stripes, including Quakers and Philadelphians, joined forces to promote
this optimism by establishing the new image of man as a reasonable, selfreliant individual capable of creating a future of unlimited enlightenment
and progress. This is the position that Leibniz eventually reached in his
Theodicy as well as in various unpublished treatises, including several of
those published by Fichant. Although there were many sources from which
                         The Kabbalah and Freedom and Determinism            111

Leibniz could have derived these ideas - Fichant, for example, mentions
Johann Wilhelm Petersen, a figure we shall come back to - his most direct
sources were van Helmont and the Lurianic Kabbalah. 314
    Leibniz's vision of man's potential is not as lofty as Pico's - he had, after
all, full knowledge of the savage butchery caused by religious disputes, particularly those of the Thirty Years' War- but he had a vision nonetheless. The
world may appear to be full of disorder, and man may commit "great errors,"
but as a "little god" in his own "microcosm," he can perform "wonders" as
well:
  Here is another particular reason for the disorder apparent in that which
  concerns men. It is that God, in giving him intelligence, has presented him
  with an image of the Divinity. He leaves him to himself, in a sense, in his
  small department... He enters there only in a secret way, for he supplies
  being, force, life, reason, without showing himself. It is there that free will
  plays its game: and God makes game (so to speak) of these little Gods
  that he thought good to produce, as we make game of children who follow
  pursuits which we secretly encourage or hinder according as it pleases us.
  Thus man is there like a little god in his own world or Microcosm, which
  he governs after his own fashion: he sometimes performs wonders therein,
  and his art often imitates nature ... But he also commits great errors, because
  he abandons himself to the passions, and because God abandons him to
  his own way.315
But as we have already seen, Leibniz believed that if men would use their
intelligence and follow the kind of method he had devised in his ars combinato ria, they could control their passions and make the world a better place.
   Like everyone else who attempted the impossible task, Leibniz failed
to present a philosophically persuasive argument that man could be free
when God was both omniscient and omnipotent. His early admission that he
was a determinist and his failed attempt to escape from this position in the
Discourse made him receptive to new solutions. The one he found came from
van Helmont and the Lurianic Kabbalah. By the end of his life Leibniz had
become a radical gnostic optimist who believed in the ultimate perfection of
man and the world.
                               CHAPTER SIX

             The Kabbalah and Leibniz's Theodicy

The great change in Leibniz's thinking about the possibility of progress
becomes abundantly clear if one compares passages from the manuscripts
published by Fichant. In'the one written in 1693, Concerning the Horizon
of Human Knowledge, Leibniz argues that if human beings were to exist for
long enough, there would inevitably come a time when everything that could
be enunciated and written down would already have been enunciated and
written down, and people would simply begin to repeat themselves:
  If the human race continues for long enough in its present condition, and
  if every 100 years, or million years, or some even greater interval, each
  individual produced at least one new statement or proposition, it would
  necessarily follow that eventually all the propositions which could be enunciated would have been exhausted and therefore a perfect repetition would
  occur, word for word, of what had already been said or enunciated before.
  One would not be able to write a sermon, poem, novel, or book which had
  not already been written by another. The common saying, "Nothing is said
  which has not been said before" would be true to the letter. 316 I find that
  the hypothesis that a certain interval of time produces at least something
  new is not certain or even reasonable. It seems rather that the difficulty of
  producing anything new continually increases.
     But perhaps the number of enunciable truths, although finite, will never
  be exhausted, just as the interval between a straight line and the curve
  of a hyperbola or conchoid is never exhausted, although it is finite. And
  even if we suppose that the human race as we know it has existed for all
  eternity, it does not necessarily follow that everything that could be said
  has already been said. However, it is true that if the human race continues
  for a long enough time, almost everything that one could say would only
  be a repetition; and if new things are often said, eventually one will be
  unable to produce any more ... But leaving such propositions aside, which
  are not entirely proven, let us content ourselves with having discovered a
  kind of horizon, which limits human knowledge, and with having elevated

                                                      Leibniz s Theodicy     113
  our understanding to such reflections, which make us recognize the limits
  which to some extent nature has placed upon it. 3I ?
The clear implication of this line of reasoning is that progress only occurs up
to a point and then stops dead in its tracks. In this text Leibniz takes to heart
the ancient idea of eternal return, or the so-called platonic year,318 which
presupposes that the universe experiences endless cycles during which the
same events continually repeat themselves. By 1701, however, Leibniz had
changed his mind. In a short text, or rather fragment of a text, Leibniz returns
to the idea that events are bound to repeat themselves, but he now denies
this on the grounds that men will continue to discover new things, and thus
progress will never stop:
   If the human race continued for long enough, the time would necessarily
   come when nothing would be said that had not been already said before.
   But it is not certain that a time will come when nothing can be said that
   has not been said before. For it could happen that certain things were never
   said, even through all eternity. Therefore, there would always remain things
   that could be said but were not yet said. There is no such thing as a perfect
   return such as in circles or ellipses, and it will not happen that one time or
   place in the universe will perfectly resemble another, although they appear
   similar to the senses.
      But suppose that one day nothing could be said that had not already
  been said before, then there must also be a time when the same events
  reoccur and when nothing happens which did not happen before, since
  events provide the matter for words.
      Furthermore, there would necessarily be certain periods like the Platonic
  year, such that in the course of a century exactly the same things would
  happen as happened before in another century. For the events of an entire
  century can be taken as one huge fact and the whole history of a century for
  one great statement. These same events either repeat or exhaust themselves
  by necessity, that is, after they exhaust themselves, they repeat themselves.
  And this can happen for different times in the same place and apply to the
  same events in different places at the same time, so that the same things
  reoccur. Such periods can even occur in each mind since they always think,
  even if in a confused way and without the attention of the spirit.
      It is possible to imagine that a time will come when the human race no
  longer exists. Nevertheless, if intelligent substances survive, which have
  no other things to think about or notions than we have, the same thing must
  happen to them.
      On the other hand, because it does not agree with the dignity of nature
  that prior events repeat themselves, it follows that more perfect intelligences are made, which have other, more profound notions and which are
114    Chapter Six

  capable of greater and more complex truths. Thus progress in knowledge
  can go on to infinity.
     Thus, it is appropriate that if human minds endure and experience platonic years, the same men return, not simply so that they might return to
  the earth but so that they might progress toward something greater in the
  manner of a spiral or winding path. This is to step back in order to jump
  farther, as across a ditch ...
     During these periods souls will not only be immortal but there will be
  something equivalent to the resurrection of the body, if not the resurrection
  itself. Indeed, I do not see how one can avoid platonic periods, at least in
  regard to notions that must remain or are distinct, in which there is nothing
  new in terms of matter but only in terms of their form or combination,
  which is limited. And indeed, if anyone understands confused notions,
  these become distinct. Therefore, because the minds which become more
  perfect make greater propositions, which are composed of smaller ones,
  their actions are more complex than their previous actions and proceed
  like a spiral or platonic year which has been augmented, so that I believe
  the same minds return often in order to pick up the thread [where they left
  offj.319

Leibniz's commitment to the inevitability of progress is even stronger in the
two last texts from 1715. I quote from the final one, which is the more fully
developed:

   ... one can conclude that the human race will not always remain in the
  same state because it does not agree with the divine harmony to always
  play the same chord. One should rather believe, following natural reasons
  as to what is appropriate, that things must advance for the better either little
  by little or by leaps. For although things often appear to become worse,
  one must think that this happens in the same way that we sometimes step
  back in order to jump farther.
       Finally, even if the human race does not always remain as it is now, if
  we suppose that minds always exist which hunt out and know the truth, it
  necessarily follows that at some time these minds will come to know truths
  that are independent of sense experience, that is, theorems of pure science,
  which can be exactly demonstrated by reasons which have already been
  discovered and which do not exceed a certain length (for example, a page,
  if they are written), and, even more, that they will discover brief formulas
  which can be written in a few words.
       This is why the new theorems to be discovered must grow in length to
  infinity, in the same way we see that there are certain geometrical proofs
  which are rather long but nonetheless handsome.
                                                       Leibniz s Theodicy     115

     If this happens, it must follow that those minds which are not yet
  sufficiently capable will become more capable so that they can comprehend
  and invent such great theorems, which are necessary to understand nature
  more deeply and to reduce physical truths to mathematics, for example,
  to understand the mechanical functioning of animals, to foresee certain
  future contingencies with a certain degree of accuracy, and to do certain
  wonderful things in nature, which are now beyond our capacity...
     Every mind has a horizon in respect to its present intellectual capacity
  but not in respect to its future intellectual capacity.32o
Fichant recognizes the significant change of view in these texts, beginning in the fragment from 1701 and culminating in the final text, which
Fichant describes as advocating a "quasi-origenism," purged of its original
weaknesses. 321 In accounting for Leibniz's change of view, Fichant looks primarily to the influence of Johann Wilhelm Petersen (1649-1727), the Lutheran theologian and minister who caused such consternation among many
of his co-religionists because of his millenarianism and belief in universal
salvation. 322
   Fichant traces Leibniz's relationship with Petersen, revealing how Leibniz's initial but distant curiosity about the man and support for his right
to espouse controversial millenarian views developed into a relationship in
which Leibniz took an active hand in planning and correcting Petersen's
philosophical poem advocating universal salvation, Uranias seu opera Dei
magna carmine heroico celebrata, published five years after Leibniz's death.
In 1706, however, fourteen years before this work was published, Leibniz had
scribbled an outline of its contents on the back of a letter Petersen had written
to him. It is worth quoting this draft in full because it so clearly indicates that
by this date Leibniz fully accepted the doctrine of universal salvation, even
though he was unwilling to advocate it publicly:
  I, who am accustomed to thinking often about how the talents of great
  men might serve to advance the public good to the greatest degree, see
  that what I have often hoped for might come from you, namely a fit and
  comprehensive work about divine matters in the form of a heroic poem.
  For theology, which shines forth in prose, would be even more sublime if
  dressed in Virgilian majesty, which you of all people could do best. This
  would be the subject of such a great work: first, God, sufficient in his
  perpetual and secret eternity; then the creation of the cosmos; and finally
  the workings of providence in the governing of the world. But the second
  part should treat the future as it pertains to the body and the soul. Here
  the purification of souls and the restitution of all things, or rather their
  gradual improvement and elevation, could be discussed. I hope that the
  last, but not the least, part of the work will concern the grandeur of the
116    Chapter Six

  celestial kingdom, or, as I call it, the divine court. There the astonishing
  virtues of the angels should be depicted in vivid colors and the happiness of
  blessed souls celebrated, blessed souls, who not only see the world under
  our feet but innumerable other worlds. From the different scenes of divine
  wisdom and goodness throughout the ages the love and veneration for the
  supreme mind will bum ever more brightly. Here is the holy place for the
  most elegant fictions, although there is nothing that can be imagined by
  us, however beautiful, that is not surpassed by the truth. I do not know
  anyone from whom one could hope for such a work aside from you, you
  who have the gift of divine eloquence and to whom the hidden recesses of
  divine matters are visible. 323
Five years later, in 1711, Petersen actually began work on the poem and Leibniz played a vital part in its execution, going so far as to correct Petersen's
poetry. Leibniz's favorable attitude towards Petersen's theory of universal
restitution went back even further, however, to 1701, when Leibniz published
an anonymous review of Petersen's first work advocating universal salvation, MV(JT'fJPwV h7rO~Q;TQ;(JTQ;(JEW~ 7rO:VTWV. Leibniz's review appeared
in Johann Georg Eckart's monthly literary digest, Monatlicher Auzug aus
allerhand neuherausgegeben nutzlichen und artigen Buchern.
   What can account for Leibniz's favorable reaction to Petersen's ideas? As
I suggested at the end of the last chapter, Leibniz's relationship with Petersen
can only be understood in terms of his relationship with van Helmont. It
is no coincidence that in his review of Petersen's book Leibniz specifically
mentions both Lady Conway and van Helmont, and it is surely significant
that he should also mention the book he ghosted for van Helmont, Thoughts
on Genesis, which itself advocated universal salvation:
  The author adds that several people still support this doctrine, especially
  during the time of the Reform ... In her Philosophical work, which contains
  the principles of the most ancient and modern philosophy, the English
  Countess writes, "Christ has sanctified in the nature of man the nature of
  all creatures, so as to restore the creatures from corruption." (This Lady
  was Countess Conway, the sister of Chancellor Heneage Finch, as one
  remembers often to have heard from Monsieur Helmont) ...
     Monsieur Francis Mercury van Helmont wished to maintain in diverse
  ways the restitution of all things and progress toward what is better in his
  Cogitata in Genesim (Thoughts on Genesis), as elsewhere. But he believed
  that souls ordinarily experience metempsychosis, that there always exists a
  certain number of human souls (and of every other sort) and that they will
  be led by revolutions from one body to another, always better, and glorified
  all together at the same time in their leader, Christ. He also maintained that
  Christ himself was a reincarnation of Adam and that all other human souls
                                                     Leibniz s Theodicy    117

  preexisted and must once again attain perfection with and in Christ (along
  with other rather extra~rdiflary ideas that came to him during his life). 324

Here as el~ewhere, in fact in all his public references to van Helmont, Leibniz
keeps his distance and hardly sounds enthusiastic. In fact, who could possibly
tell from this paragraph - supposing one knew the review was written by
Leibniz, as some people eventually did - that Leibniz had any part whatsoever
in the writing and publication of Thoughts on Genesis? Nevertheless, to my
mind van Helmont is the missing link between Leibniz and Petersen. Petersen
knew van Helmont and van Helmont's writings as well as Lady Conway's
were clearly sources he used, as his references to both reveal. 325 In fact,
Petersen's arguments in favor of universal salvation closely follow those
given by van Helmont and Lady Conway, namely that eternal punishment
for finite sins is out of all proportion and inconsistent with God's mercy and
justice; that God could not possibly damn people who, through no fault of
their own, had never hard of Christianity; and finally that pain and suffering
are beneficial and God only punishes his creatures for their own good and
eventual salvation. The documents that Fichant has assembled can therefore
best be understood if placed within the larger context of Leibniz's knowledge
of and interest in the Lurianic Kabbalah. What made Leibniz so receptive to
Petersen was his exposure to the kabbalistic idea of tikkun, an idea that is
a basic aspect of all van Helmont's writing and all his thinking and one he
discussed at length with Leibniz. However stand-offish Leibniz was publicly
about van Helmont and his ideas, the very fact that he refers to both so often
indicates the measure of his interest.
    But did Leibniz eventually embrace the idea of universal salvation? At
the end of his study Fichant raises this question but says the answer goes
beyond the scope of his work. However, he gives many indications that
the answer is positive. 326 As I have already suggested, I believe Leibniz
eventually did accept the idea of universal salvation. In the remaining part of
this chapter I offer evidence, in addition to that given by Fichant, showing
how preoccupied Leibniz was with the question of progress, especially during
the years between 1694 and 1696. Fichant notes that Leibniz's views changed
radically from 1693 to 1701. I would argue that the change occurred earlier,
that by the time Leibniz wrote Thoughts on Genesis in 1697 he had come to
believe progress was inevitable. This conviction, in tum, provided the basis
for his final theodicy. But if, as I contend, Leibniz's exposure to the Lurianic
Kabbalah was an important factor in his acceptance of the idea of universal
salvation, it is essential to know exactly what Isaac Luria and his disciple,
Francis Mercury van Helmont, thought about this issue.
   Isaac Luria was a thoroughgoing proponent of metempsychosis, the belief
that souls were continually reincarnated until they achieved salvation and
118    Chapter Six

were freed from the cycle of birth and death. Luria believed that all souls,
including human ones, could go up or down the ladder of creation, depending
on their behavior. Pain and suffering were therefore an inevitable aspect of
purification:
   There are few men who are able to avoid revolution in some animal or
   vegetable, and similarly in some other creature of the world. For which
   reason everyone is compelled to undergo his punishment in both body
   and soul because he is brought into a certain bodily state in order that he
   might be able to feel those pains which he merits. And all things happen
   according to the nature ofthe sin. 327
As I have argued in several articles, the Lurianic Kabbalah provided van
Helmont, von Rosenroth, and Lady Conway with a way to vindicate God
from the charge of injustice by showing that he had created his creatures
with full knowledge of their ultimate redemption. 328 These ideas are set out
repeatedly in the books written by van Helmont as well as in Lady Conway's
one book, The Principles ofAncient and Modern Philosophy, which reiterates
van Helmont's ideas. 329 In van Helmont's opinion, the strongest argument in
favor of the reincarnation of souls comes from a consideration of the divine
attributes:
  Now which way can we reconcile with the Attributes of God that he who
  is a wise and perfect Creator, who hath created all things in some wise
  order, that they might all at last be able to attain their full and ultimate
  perfection, should have created such imperfect Creatures as Fools and
  Naturals, Abortions and Monsters and all those wicked and barbarous men
  we find in the world, etc.? Now to suppose that all these must continue in
  this their state of imperfection, would not this run directly contrary to the
  forementioned Attributes? But how can this be, that God should work and
  act contrary to his own nature and himself?330
Vindictiveness is not part of the divine nature. God's justice requires that he
punish his creatures according to their misdeeds and for their benefit. Evil by
its very nature cannot be absolute; therefore at some future, glorious time all
things will be perfected:
  ... the punishment of wicked men is not to be looked upon as that whereby
  the Creature should still become worse and worse; but as it is in order to the
  changing of it from Evil to Good, for that when the Evil is transchanged,
  the Good then begins to work upwards, by innumerable steps of ascension
  towards God, through it can never reach so high as to reach his Being or
  Essence (for as much as it is impossible that a Creature should become
  God), but must therefore continue to mount upwards, and continually attain
  to more and greater degrees of Glory.331
                                                     Leibniz s Theodicy    119

The concept of eternal punishment is an anathema. God may punish his
creatures, but only out of love and with their redemption in mind:
  If God be unchangeable, as certainly he is, can he absolutely hate any of his
  Creatures, which once he loved? And if when he most severely punishes
  his Creatures, he loveth them, is not then his punishing them an Act of
  Love, and consequently medicinal, or in order to their recovery?332
Luria's conviction that pain and suffering were prerequisites to redemption
dovetailed with the fundamental alchemical idea that transmutation only
occurs as a result of death and suffering. The first, or "black," stage in
transmutation was thus understandably referred to as the "death" or "mortification" of the base matter being worked upon. 333 As an alchemist and
Kabbalist van Helmont took these ideas in a very personal way. When he was
arrested and imprisoned by the Inquisition on the charge of "judaizing," he
concluded that if worse came to worse and he were to be burned, it would do
his soul good. 334 That he was able to convince Lady Conway of the redemptive value of suffering at least offered her some philosophical consolation
for her own pronounced pain, which medicine was powerless to alleviate. As
Lady Conway wrote in her treatise:
  ... all pain and torment stimulates the life or spirit existing in everything
  which suffers. As we see from the constant experience and as reason
  teaches us, this must necessarily happen because through pain and suffering
  whatever grossness or crassness is contracted by the spirit or body is
  diminished and, consequently, the spirit is set free and becomes more
  spiritual and therefore more active and effective through pain. 335
Lady Conway repeated these ideas in a way that may have especially appealed
to Leibniz because of her introduction of the concept of infinity:
   ... a body is always able to become more and more spiritual to infinity
  since God, who is the first and highest spirit, is infinite and does not nor
  cannot partake of the least corporeity. Consequently, it is the nature of a
  creature, unless it degenerates, always to become more and more like the
  creator. But, because there is no being which is in every way contrary to
  God (surely nothing exists which is infinitely and immutably evil as God
  is infinitely and immutably good, and there is nothing which is infinitely
  dark as God is infinitely light, nor is anything infinitely a body having
  no spirit, as God is infinitely spirit having no body), it is therefore clear
  that no creature can become more and more a body to infinity, although it
  can become more and more a spirit to infinity. And nothing can become
  darker and darker to infinity, although it can become brighter and brighter
  to infinity. For this reason nothing can be evil to infinity, although it can
  become better and better to infinity.336
120    Chapter Six

The Lurianic Kabbalah solved another thorny problem for Christians by
making sense of the concept of original sin. How could generations who
came into being long after the death of Adam and Eve be held accountable
for an original sin they never committed? Van Helmont stated the problem
clearly:
   Does it ... remove the difficulty, to say, as some do, that those woeful effects
   came upon Adam's Posterity for his sin? For besides that it seems unjust,
   and contrary to Scripture to continue so great a misery so long, upon so
   many thousands for his sin only, except they had been consenting to it, and
   that they could not be if they had no being; besides this I say, do we not
   see this misery fall very unequally, some being born fools and mad men,
   others with a large capacity of Natural Understanding; now how can this
   be only for Adam's sin, in the Judgment of these very men, seeing they
   say that all are equally guilty for it?337
Van Helmont found the solution in the Lurianic Kabbalah, for Luria maintained that the souls of every individual preexisted in the body of the first man,
Adam. Thus when he sinned, every soul sinned with him. Luria's theory was
set out in the treatise Concerning the Revolution of Souls, which appeared in
the Kabbala Denudata:
   Certainly all minds, spirits, and souls without exception, were comprehended in Adam Protoplastus when he was made. Certain souls related to
   Adam's head; certain to his eyes; others to his nose; and thus to all of his
   limbs, from which it is as if they derived. 338
Leibniz was clearly aware of this kabbalistic idea and mentions it several
times, for example in the anonymous review he wrote of Petersen's book
quoted above. He also mentions it in a letter to Thomas Burnett, although
with a characteristic disclaimer:
  Monsieur van Helmont believed that the soul of Jesus was that of Adam
  and that this new Adam repaired what the first had damaged; it was the
  same person who paid off his ancient debt. I think one does well to spare
  oneself the trouble of refuting such ideas. 339
One might well ask here and elsewhere, if this opinion was so ridiculous,
why did Leibniz bother to mention it? Once again I would answer, because he
really did not find it ridiculous; in fact, he accepted it. As Gaston Grua pointed
out, Leibniz was very good at propagating opinions he found attractive and
probable, without actually advocating them. 34o
   The same idea appears in a more general and philosophically acceptable
form in the book Leibniz wrote in van Helmont's name:
                                                      Leibniz's Theodicy    121

  We may take notice, that every present thing doth contain the seeds of all
  the future individuals of its kind, as itself also was contained in the seeds
  of the thing already past. Wherefore there are as many things as there are
  seeds, and neither more nor less. 341
The same idea is presented in a slightly different form in another passage from
the same book, where Leibniz describes all created things as having been
produced by God from "seeds" which contain within themselves an "active"
and "spontaneous" "force" which allows them to progress or regress:
  All things having been produced by Aelohim from seeds, since these were
  in him before [creation] but now subsist by themselves, having left him,
  and they have an active and spontaneous force so that they are able to
  progress or fall in as much as the whole world fell in Adam. 342
In their activity and spontaneity, these "seeds" anticipate Leibniz's monads.
What is especially interesting is that van Helmont thought he had found support for this Lurianic concept of pre-existence in the microscopic observations
of Swammerdam, Kerckring, and Malpighi. As we saw earlier, Leibniz had
looked to these same microscopists to validate his theory of preformation.
Swammerdam and Kerckring believed correctly that a woman was born with
all the eggs which she would later produce. Both Leibniz and van Helmont
interpreted this to support the idea that all souls, or in Leibniz's case monads,
originated at the beginning of creation and never ceased to exist. In taking this position, they accepted the most popular of the two current theories
about generation, the preformation theory rather than the theory of epigenesis.
The preformation theory that life is a process of development, unfolding, or
expansion, rather than generation proper, fit well with the elder van Helmont's
theory of the archeus as well as with the Aristotelian idea of substantial form.
It also led to the concept of emboitement, that individuals were enclosed one
within another in a line stretching back to Adam, who contained the whole
human race within himself.
    Leibniz was well aware of the dilemma the doctrine of original sin posed
for Christians, which is precisely why he accepted the kabbalistic doctrine
that all created souls had originally existed in Adam and consequently sinned
with him. He makes this point in his Theodicy, in a passage which appears
to me to be greatly indebted to van Helmont's kabbalistic belief that souls
ascend the spiritual ladder as they evolve from lower forms of life to men:
  It is thus my belief that those souls which one day shall be human souls,
  like those of other species, have been in the seed, and in the progenitors
  as far back as Adam, and have consequently existed since the beginning of things, always in a kind of organic body. On this point it seems
  that M. Swammerdam, Father Malebranche, M. Bayle, Mr. Pitcaime, M.
122    Chapter Six

   Hartsoeker and numerous other very able persons share my opinion. This
   doctrine is also sufficiently confirmed by the microscopic observations of
   M. Leeuwenhoek and other good observers. But it also for diverse reasons
   appears likely to me that they existed then as sentient or animal souls
   only, endowed with perception and feeling, and devoid of reason. Further
   I believe that they remained in this state up to the time of the generation of
   the man to whom they were to belong, but that then they received reason,
   whether there be a natural means of raising a sentient soul to the degree of
   a reasoning soul (a thing I find it difficult to imagine) or whether God may
   have given reason to this soul through some special operation, or (if you
   will) by a kind of transcreation. This latter is easier to admit, inasmuch
   as revelation teaches much about other forms of immediate operation by
   God upon our souls. This explanation appears to remove the obstacles
   that beset this matter in philosophy or theology. For the difficulty of the
   origin of forms thus disappears completely; and besides it is much more
   appropriate to divine justice to give the soul, already corrupted physically
   on the animal si~ by the sin of Adam, a new perfection which is reason,
   than to put a reasoning soul, by creation or otherwise in abody wherein it
   is to be corrupted morally.343

Thus, while Leibniz rejected van Helmont's notion of the transmigration of
souls, he favored the preformationist theory of the transformation of souls.
Anne Becco sees this as a major difference between the two men. 344 But
are the two ideas so very different? Not if one looks back to van Helmont's
Dialogue in answer to More and remembers the description of monads falling
down into a "drowsie," i.e. more material, state. Here van Helmont outlines an
evolutionary scheme of transformation in which monads move up and down
the ladder of creation as they become more "spiritual," i.e. active, or more
"material," i.e. passive. In fact, one can only envision the transmigration of
souls in a dualistic scheme where souls can move from one bit of matter to
another, and as I have tried to argue, van Helmont was a monist, as was Leibniz. Thus the debate over transmigration versus transformation is something
like the debate about whether or not Leibniz is a realist or a phenomenalist. The
answer is that both sets of oppositions - transmigration/transformation and
realist/phenomenalist - disappear from a gnostic perspective. For Gnostics,
and this includes Lurianic Kabbalists and alchemists, matter and soul cannot
be separated; they are, as explained above, opposite ends of a continuum.
    If this is indeed the case, then why does Leibniz take such pains to distinguish his idea of transformation from van Helmont's transmigration? The
answer should be obvious. Leibniz did not want to be taken for a magus or a
Kabbalist. His rejection of Newton's concept of gravity on the grounds that
it reintroduced occult qualities indicates how much he wanted to rationalize
                                                     Leibniz's Theodicy    123

science, just as he wanted to rationalize all other forms of knowledge. But
he was not willing to pay the high price of eliminating mind, spirit, or soul
from his scientific world picture as Cartesians and mechanical philosophers
did. Nor was he willing to introduce substantial forms or vital spirits when
nothing definitive or useful could be said about them. This was the basis of
his criticism of both the Scholastics and the Cambridge Platonists. Leibniz's
position was therefore unique and uniquely difficult to fathom at the time he
devised it. By introducing the concept of force as the defining characteristic
of monads, he was able to reunite metaphysics and mechanics in a way that
only began to be appreciated long after his death, for force is at one and the
same time both a measurable and a spiritual entity (because it is "active").
   As I have tried to demonstrate, matter is also eliminated as a real entity
in van Helmont's kabbalistic scheme since all matter originates from God as
spirit and only becomes matter as its energy diminishes and it "slips down"
and becomes "drowsie" or "contracted." The notion that God could have
created matter was an anathema to van Helmont because he believed this
implied that God was the author of sin and suffering. Thus, in order to save
the divine attributes and create a viable theodicy, van Helmont rejected the
idea of creation ex nihilo. As we have seen, Leibniz also denies creation
ex nihilo in the book he wrote in van Helmont's name. Reacting against
Henry More's forceful advocacy of this doctrine, which More took to be a
cornerstone of Christianity, van Helmont argues that if creation had been ex
nihilo, then the distinction between God and matter would be obliterated and
God would be responsible for evil:

  But from the common opinion that matter is created by God out of nothing
  these absurd and incongruous propositions may follow. 1. It might be said
  that from a most perfect, most intelligent, most free being, who has in
  himself motion in its highest degree, who is most penetrating, immutable,
  positive, alive, etc., a most imperfect being is produced, lacking all knowledge, intellect, and understanding in the highest degree, [a being] in the
  highest degree forced, compelled, and obligated to laws of passive motion
  and, therefore, altogether deprived of freedom and will, [a being] lacking
  motion in itself in the highest degree unless subjected to motions impressed
  [upon it] by others, and so, itself in the highest degree motionless and at
  rest, lacking in itself all active as well as passive penetration, [a being]
  highly changeable, completely bereft of all blessedness and so completely
  dead and senseless as to have absolutely nothing of those things which
  are contained in its cause, for which reason its nature is said by many to
  be completely contrary to God. And since just as an efficient cause cannot produce anything completely like itself, so it cannot produce anything
  completely unlike itself. 2. This vile and inane created thing, which we
124    Chapter Six

   justly say occupies the least part of the universe is said, according to common opinion, to be co-extensive with God, nay, to coexist and to be on the
   same level with him, and, consequently, this thing is held in such esteem
   that an entire doctrine may be drawn from all of gentile philosophy on this
   subject alone, which is taken as the basis of all theorems concerning spirit
   and God (which they term, to demonstrate a posteriori - reasoning from
   the latter to the former - from which comes that cursed materialism and
   consequently atheism). 3. Just as to be and not to be imply contradiction,
   so the consequence of this contradiction is that ex means not to be, if one
   should speak accurately about the laws of causality. 4. In the same way,
   God should be said to have created death, sin, darkness, monsters, evil,
   etc., which are privations, as matter is a privation of the nature of spirit.
   Indeed, no single positive term should with any merit enter into a definition of this [matter], because divisibility, either in the abstract or in atoms,
   cannot agree with [the nature of] God. 5. The creation of matter out of
   nothing is totally contradictory to the wisdom of God. Indeed, in such a
   case [creation ex nihilo], wisdom could have made all creation spiritual,
   which would have been best, but nevertheless it would have made something that was not spirit and not the best. 6. It [creation ex nihilo] is against
   his goodness because he would have created something lacking a share of
   his full goodness. 7. It is against his excellence since it is completely distant from the first excellence. 8. Nay, an immediate step would be judged
   to have been made from one extreme to the other. 9. Wherefore it would
   be absurd to admit further absurdities in order to avoid absurdities that do
   not necessarily flow from the hypothesis or [to admit absurdities] that are
   harmful to the soul and reign of the Messiah, [absurdities] which sink the
   mind into the filthy pit of matter so that it is as if matter is finally made as
   a result of the destruction of spirit. May God avert this !345

This argument against creation ex nihilo combined with van Helmont's previous description of monads as "slip[ing] down from the state of knowing"
anticipates Leibniz concept of monads as self-activated centers of energy
which move up and down the scale of creation as their passive, resistant (i.e.
"material") natures either increase or decrease. It is therefore my contention
that shorn of its more fantastic elements, the Lurianic doctrine of tikkun, or
the restoration of all created things to their original perfection, makes its way
into Leibniz's theodicy.
   Leibniz is best known for his theory of the "best of all possible worlds,"
so mercilessly ridiculed by Voltaire. The whole thrust of Voltaire's scathing
and humorous critique was to prove by means of example piled on top of
horrendous example that this miserable world, filled with cowards, thieves,
fanatics, and homicidal maniacs who run rings around the virtuous and pious,
                                                       Leibniz's Theodicy     125

is the very opposite of the best and that its creator is consequently neither
wise nor benevolent. But Voltaire's witty diatribe misses the mark because,
while Leibniz has been caricatured as saying this present world is the best of
all possible worlds, he really believes something quite different, namely that
this world is the best because it has the capacity to become better and better.
Loemker recognizes this aspect of Leibniz's theodicy, although he does not
think much of it:
  Sin is, as Russell points out, merely materia prima and the limited, actions
  arising out of this source of confusion. Within this inadequate a priori
  conception of evil, Leibniz offers the various explanations of badness that
  have been used in every theodicy which has appeared since - the appeal to
  ignorance, to the instrumental goods involved in many apparent evils, to
  the possibility of higher spirits than men, to the necessity for restricting the
  good of the individual in the best society, to immortality and its assurance
  of continued growth toward perfection. Evil, being merely the relative term
  for the finiteness implied in existence, time, and plurality, thus becomes
  virtually a datum in the teleological argument. 346
To attribute sin or evil to matter, as both Leibniz and van Helmont do, is to
utilize the gnostic and neoplatonic ploy of defining evil as privation. "Sin
is not from God," Leibniz remarks in On the True Theologia Mystica, "but
original sin has arisen in some creatures from their non-being and hence out
of nothingness.,,347 He repeats this idea in the Discourse 348 and again in
the Theodicy. Here he draws an interesting analogy between evil and cold,
reminiscent of Dante's Inferno, where the devil is not surrounded by fire but
frozen in ice:
  Evil itself only comes from privation; the positive enters therein only
  by concomitance, as the active enters by concomitance into cold. We
  see that water in freezing is capable of breaking a gun-barrel wherein it is
  confined; and yet cold is a certain privation of force, it only comes from the
  diminution of a movement which separates the particles of fluid. When this
  separating motion becomes weakened in the water by the cold, the particles
  of compressed air concealed in the water collect; and, becoming larger, they
  become more capable of acting outwards through their buoyancy. 349
Dismissing this idea of evil as privation, as rather tiresome and unhelpful,
which Loemker essentially does, would make sense if Leibniz had not also
accepted the equally gnostic view that every created thing will eventually
reach a state of perfection as a result of repeated transformations. For it really
does not matter to an individual that the world will get better unless that
individual continues to exist and improve along with everything else. While
Grua argues that Leibniz believed in the gradual improvement of all things
126    Chapter Six

from approximately 1671 onwards,35o this belief only became a decisive
aspect of Leibniz's theodicy after his prolonged contact with van Helmont
and after he wrote Thoughts on Genesis. The idea that each single created
thing will ultimately reach perfection does not appear in the Discourse, but
it does appears in the short treatise On the Radical Origination of Things
written in the same year as Thoughts on Genesis, 1697.
   But before turning to this document, it is helpful to look at three documents
which in Grua's estimation date from between 1694 and 1696, precisely the
years ofLeibniz's most extensive contact with van Helmont. These documents
show that Leibniz was thinking about progress and perfection but had not yet
come to the conclusion he would reach in On the Radical Origination of
Things that both are an integral aspect of the created world, a conclusion he
repeats in the documents edited and published by Fichant. Grua speculates
that these documents were inspired either by Leibniz's conversations with van
Helmont or by reading his works. 351 The first two documents offer a somewhat
tortured and tentative discussion about whether or not things progress and
become perfect. I include them to highlight the contrast between the ideas
expressed in them with Leibniz's later views in On the Radical Origination of
Things. I believe their existence strengthens my argument that Leibniz began
to think seriously about progress as a result of his contact with van Helmont
and that he gradually came to accept van Helmont's optimistic and basically
kabbalistic views in a less mythical form.
   Concerning Infinite Progress

  If all things in the course of ascending descend again and do not proceed in a straight path, the question arises of how progress to infinity may
  be defined, whether as ascent, descent, or neither. If we say that something
  ascends, another will say that it descends again after a long period, even if
  at some other time it ascends again. Therefore I say that it is a true ascent if
  we posit a point below which there is no further descent and after a certain
  time it at length arrives back to the higher point below which it does not
  descend any further (and so on to infinity). The same argument, on the
  other hand, applies to descent because if there is no point about which it
  can be said now or at any time that there is no returning here, there will be
  a revolution in which there is neither ascent nor decent. 352
In the second document, Leibniz begins by rejecting the idea that the world
increases in perfection, but ends by suggesting that it does. I have highlighted
the key sentences.
  Whether the world becomes more perfect:
                                                       Leibniz's Theodicy    127

  It is asked whether the whole world becomes more or less perfect or
  whether the world always maintains the same degree of perfection, which
  I prefer to think, although different parts alter their perfection variously
  among themselves as one thing becomes another. If the perfection of the
  world remains constant, then certain substances are not able to increase
  or decrease in perfection perpetually. A substance growing in perfection
  either continues to increase or decreases, but in such a way that it appears to
  have increased more than decreased. If a substance proceeds either directly
  or by intervals to infinite perfection, it is necessary to assign a maximum
  degree of perfection below which it will never later descend and afterwards
  it will be greater than before. Nevertheless, it is not necessary that the highest degree of ascent is always an advance. In which case, it is necessary
  that the lowest degree of ascent within a given time, although it always
  advances, nevertheless reaches a certain limit or finally reaches a certain
  limit or attains the highest ascent, in which case the substance maintains
  the same degree of perfection eternally. If the lowest degree ceases at some
  point to advance or has some limit above which it does not ascend, but the
  highest degree of ascent always advances, then it proceeds towards infinite
  perfection. But this process is completed when the lowest descent also has
  no limit above which it cannot ascend.
      But if a substance descends to infinity below a certain degree and if it
  also ascends below a certain degree, it will nevertheless appear to ascend
  if it ascends rather than descends.
      Whether we might say that the world increases [crescere] by a necessary
  power because everything that has passed away has been furnished with
  souls. For, as we have demonstrated elsewhere, complete oblivion is not
  permitted to souls. Although we do not remember distinct things, nevertheless we now perceive the whole which is constitutedfrom the parts into
  which all previous actions enter. Whether, therefore, souls should always
  be carried forward through periods toward more manifest thoughts. If it
  cannot happen that a perfection is given which does not increase, it follows
  that the perfection of the universe always increases. Thus there is more
  perfection than ifit did not increase. [Will] Happiness does not consist in
  a certain highest grade, but in the perpetual increase of joy. The highest
  Being does not increase in perfection because it is beyond time and change
  and contains equally both the presentandfuture. 353

The third and last document entitled Of Man, Happiness, God, and Christ
is in my opinion a crucial text in terms of Leibniz's theodicy. It is a resume
of kabbalistic, alchemical, and gnostic ideas typical of van Helmont; but
even more importantly, it elaborates the kabbalistic doctrine of tikkun, or
the final redemption of all things, and advances the view that it is the inner
128    Chapter Six

Christ, not the external Christ on the cross, who has the power to save. The
Pelagian implications of this idea are obvious. The main points of this document include the following ideas which would have been relevant to anyone
thinking in terms of a theodicy: the created world was produced by divine
emanation; God contains "all in one" and everything tends towards this one;
internal good flows from within (an idea reminiscent of Leibniz's view that
monads are entirely self-activated); matter is a source of contagion, from
which souls must remove themselves; everything seeks the highest good but
differently; evil is nothing but privation; suffering and punishment are temporary and salutary; selfishness and self-love were Lucifer's major sin (thus,
by implication charity towards one's fellow man is imperative); and lastly,
a repetition of the idea that everything ultimately returns to God. Axiom
23 contains an especially interesting insertion that sounds very much like
the voice of Leibniz cropping up in the middle of a kabbalistic document.
According to this axiom, bodies come from "stars (or rather forms, archeai,
ideas, or astral forces)," but, as Leibniz says, "I might rather say, more philosophically, the active forces of the first universe." This document provides
clear evidence that Leibniz was re-emersing himself in kabbalistic philosophy
during these years, especially in those aspects dealing with creation, the fall,
and redemption. I have highlighted the sentences that are especially relevant
in this regard:

  Concerning Man, Blessedness, God, and Christ
     1) In man there is spirit, soul and body: 354 or mind, reason, flesh or sense.
  Mind considers higher matters, reason things in the middle, and sense
  inferior matters. Three worlds, the divine, the Angelic < spiritual> ,355 the
  sensible. 356 The superior world contains the inferior. The inferior is the
  shadow of the superior. [An angel has every inferior world in himself in a
  spiritual manner so that he can display it if he wishes.]357 God contains all
  in one and everything tends toward this one; this is the highest good of all
  things. Good is internal and external. The first is true, the second falsely
  called good. Internal good flows from us; external good, as is generally
  accepted, can be called fortune, and it is not in our power.
     2) Particular external goods (of body and mind) come from fortune or
  they are acquired either from nature, study, or chance. Nevertheless, everything is called fortuitous in a certain sense and comes from the heavens
  (that is from the whole flow of bodies) and, as they are given by chance,
  they can be taken away by it.
     3) Terrestrial man comes from this world, or slime, whence he depends
  on the heavens or fortune. While men are eager for good fortune, they
  make themselves slaves of the stars <like brutes>. Fortune harasses its
  slaves <as it changes> just as soldiers are worn out by marching. But
                                                  Leibniz s Theodicy    129

the immortal part of man must dominate astral fate or bodily impressions.
Wisdom is greater than fate (those who think about the immortal part of
themselves recognize the angels as brothers, God as a father, and the body
as a servant). For the better part of us is created in the image of God like
the angels. Those who engage in contemplating these things and dwell on
eternal matters, removing the soul from sensible things, will be removed
from corporeal contagion and dominate the stars. They will see the clouds
and the stars of heaven beneath their feet.
   4) Sadness and joy improperly linked to fortune.
   5) She only lends her gifts; a mistake to abide there.
   6) Everything seeks the highest good, but differently.
   7) Riches, transitory or deceitful, and not honorable.
   8) Honor fortuitous and artificial.
   9) Posthumous glory limited.
    10) Pleasures, beauty transitory. No happiness on earth.
    11) Earthly goods compete among themselves. God alone unites all
goods.
    12) Even brought together they are nothing but the shadow of true goods.
   13) True goodness, wisdom, justice, and happiness are essentially in
God.
    14) God united. Adhering to God, we become a first-born witness (Jo.
 17).
    15) Men become happy "by obtaining divinity," sons of God by Christ.
    16) The end of things, that is the good. Separating ourselves, we
renounce our being.
   17) Everything obeys God. Evil is nothing; it comes from privation in
the creatures.
   18) Evil consists in the degree to which all things do not attain the
highest good. However, evil is useful to the good.
   19) To do evil is impotence. Evil men serve good men, as beasts men.
   20) Amelioration by punishment.
   21) Impunity is not chance but sickness. Pity for the wicked.
   22) All providential events are good for the good.
   23) An ascent from the sensible to the intellectual, from creatures to
God ... God produces angels by saying, "let there be light." From this light
stars (or rather forms, archeai, ideas, or astral forces <or I might rather
say, more philosophically, the active forces of the first universe», bodies
come from these.
   24) God, a maximum o/infinity, a minimum o/indivisibility ... Christ the
center of eternal life.
130    Chapter Six

       25) Lucifer sought his happiness in himself. It is a law of nature that
   condemns that "self love" as idolatry. "To be turned towards himself
   is to aim at nothing. Concerning these things see Theologia Germanica,
   Kempis, and Tauler. Finally God shines for everything, like the sun, but
   those [trying to] ascend by themselves do not see him."
       26) Evil is possible on account of blindness. "But it is not God's part to
   violate the order of the highest things."
      27) "True theology in the knowledge of Adam and Christ, of ourselves
   and of God. Of Adam, to tum to oneself < to eat the body and blood of
   Adam>. Of Christ, to abandon oneself to God < to eat the body and blood
   of the son of God>."
      The external Adam does no harm, only the internal. The external Christ
   does not come forward but the internal. Therefore he who puts on Christ
   in faith has within himself life, light, God, the highest good (Everything
   returns to one, or to God). This is to understand the harmony of things ...
   The divine light shines in the shadows of the creatures. 358
Could these be notes jotted down by Leibniz after one of his many conversations with van Helmont? As we saw from Leibniz's journal entries, he spent
a great deal of time with van Helmont when he visited Hanover in 1696, and
he kept notes of their discussions. 359
   As we have seen, before his departure from Hanover in August, 1696 van
Helmont had entrusted Leibniz with the task of arranging for a new edition of
Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy. Van Helmont believed the book would
be better received if it had the approbation of the two Electresses, Sophie
of Hanover and her daughter, Sophie Charlotte of Brandenburg. To this end,
Leibniz wrote to Sophie Charlotte, enclosing copies of the book. One can
see from his letter that he was preoccupied with the question of reconciling
divine justice with the apparent disorder in the universe. He makes the very
interesting suggestion that we may not be able to recognize the inherent
beauty and order of the universe because we only see a tiny portion of it in
our brief lifes; but he adds that we will gain increasing knowledge of this
perfection as our "condition changes." This suggests to me that Leibniz is
steadily moving towards van Helmont's view that individuals will experience
many different incarnations until they eventually reach a state of perfection:
  Madame. It is at the command of Madam, the Electress of Brunswick, that
  I take the liberty of sending this packet of books to your Serene Electress.
  Before leaving here, Mr. Helmont asked me to arrange for a new edition of
  the very good German edition of the famous book of Boetius, the Roman
  consul during the period the Goths were masters of Rome. Although the
  book, entitled The Consolation of Philosophy (copies of which have been
  sent with this letter), has had throughout time the general approval of
                                                       Leibniz s Theodicy     131

  the most knowledgeable, Mr. Helmont believed with reason that it would
  be even better received in the world at present if it had the approbation
  of the two great Electresses, whose intellect is no less elevated than their
  rank, and who appear to possess, by a singular gift from heaven, a judicious
  judgment about sublime matters which exceed the capacity of common and
  profane people. Mr. Helmont has special affection for this book because
  he believes he can find traces of Pythagorean ideas in it. But aside from
  that, it must be said that the author says some very beautiful and sensible
  things about the order of the universe. Because seeing the success of the
  wicked, the misfortunes of the good, the brevity and bad luck of ordinary
  life, and the thousands of examples of apparent disorder that meet our eyes,
  it seems that everything happens by chance. But those who have examined
  things closely find that everything is so well regulated that they do not
  doubt that the universe is governed by a sovereign intelligence with such
  perfect order that if one understood it in detail, one would not only believe
  but would also see that nothing better could be wished for. The apparent
  disorder is like certain chords in music which seem awkward when they are
  heard by themselves but which a knowledgeable composer inserts in the
  piece because, in joining them with other chords, he enhances the music
  and makes the harmony more beautiful. And since what we now see is
  only a very small portion of the infinite universe, and because our present
  life is only a little portion of what will happen to us, we should not be
  astonished if all the beauty of things does not reveal itself at first sight. But
  we will discover it more and more, and this is why it is necessary for us
  to change our condition. It is a bit like the movements of the stars, which
  seem irregular to those who observe them for only a few years. However,
  over the course of centuries one can see that there is nothing so beautiful
  or well ordered. This is why common people cannot conceive of these
  things. They never consider the general order; they do not even understand
  their own religion. Having only false ideas about the divinity, they hover
  between ill-founded superstition and free-thinking, whether they fear evil
  or fear nothing at all. But why should I say more about these things which
  Boetius explains much better and which your sublime intellect understands
  even better than Boetius? I only thought it appropriate to give some idea
  of the book I send ... 360

By the time Leibniz wrote On the Radical Origination of Things in 1697 he
had accepted the idea that progress was an integral aspect of the di vine scheme
and that each created thing would experience repeated transformations until
it reached full perfection. He begins this short treatise by putting forward the
idea that this world is the best possible: " ... the world is not only the most
perfect naturally or, if you prefer, metaphysically - in other words, that series
132     Chapter Six

of things has been produced which actually presents the greatest amount of
reality - but also that it is the most perfect morally, because moral perfection is
truly natural.,,361 Leibniz anticipates the kind of objection raised by Voltaire:
   You may object, however, that we experience the very opposite of this in the
   world, for often the very worst things happen to the best; innocent beings,
   not only beasts but men, are struck down and killed, even tortured. In fact,
   especially if we consider the government of mankind, the world seems
   rather a kind of confused chaos than something ordained by a supreme
   wisdom. 362
He responds that this objection is only superficial and that if one considers
the matter more carefully, "the opposite can be established." He then trots out
the tired arguments mentioned by Loemker: men only have a bird's eye view
and cannot imagine the beauty of the whole; apparent evils contribute to the
greater good; we would not appreciate the good without the bad, and so forth.
But he does riot stop with these bromides but goes right to the heart of the
matter, maintaining that all would not be for the best unless the well-being of
each individual was looked after:
   ... we must recognize that, just as care is taken in the best-ordered republic
   that individuals shall fare as well as possible, so the universe would not be
   perfect enough unless as much care is shown for individuals as is consistent
   with the universal harmony. No better measure for this matter can be set
   up than the law of justice itself, which dictates that each one shall take
   part in the perfection of the universe and his own happiness according to
   the measure of his own virtue and the degree to which his will is moved
   toward the common good. And in this very thing is fulfilled what we
   call the charity and the love of God, in which alone the force and power
   of the Christian religion also consists, according to the opinion of wise
   theologians. 363
Even this is pretty standard stuff, tapering off as it does with the idea that
everything shares in the perfection of the universe according to the measure
of its own virtue. It is only in the last three paragraphs of this short essay that
Leibniz reveals the kabbalistic source of his ideas. In the first paragraph, he
describes affliction and punishment as "temporary evils" which are simply
"short cuts to greater perfection." As we have seen, this was one of Van
Helmont's basic convictions and one he mercifully convinced Lady Conway
to accept as an explanation for her excruciating headaches. Interestingly
enough, to illustrate this point Leibniz uses two examples commonly used
by alchemists, the germination of seeds, which must "suffer" before they
bear fruit, and distillation. The analogy with germinating seeds fit in well
both with Christianity (John 12: 24: "Except a com of wheat fall into the
                                                       Leibniz's Theodicy     133

ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit")
and the Lurianic idea that fallen souls were enveloped in "husks." In the
penultimate paragraph Leibniz speaks of a "perpetual and most free progress
towards greater culture.,,364 In the final paragraph he refers explicitly to
the gnostic mythic of "drowsie," "sleeping" souls which will eventually be
"aroused." This was precisely the terminology that van Helmont had used
in his Cabbalistic Dialogue. Once again I have highlighted the passages that
show the clearest kabbalistic affiliations:
  As for the ajjlictions, especially of good men, however, we must take it
  as certain that these lead to their greater good and that this is true not
  only theologically but also naturally. So a seed sown in the earth suffers
  before it bears fruit. In general, one may say that, though ajjlictions are
  temporary evils, they are good in effect, for they are short cuts to greater
  perfection. So in physics the liquids which ferment slowly also are slower
  to settle, while those in which there is a stronger disturbance settle more
  promptly, throwing off impurities with greater force. We may well call this
  stepping back in order to spring forward with greater force ...
     As the crown of the universal beauty and perfection of the works of God,
  we must also recognize that the entire universe is involved in a perpetual
  and most free progress, so that it is always advancing toward greater
  culture. Thus a great part of our earth has now received cultivation and
  will receive it more and more. And though it is true that some sections
  occasionally revert into wilderness or are destroyed and sink back again,
  this must be understood in the same sense in which I have just explained
  the nature of afflictions, namely, that this very destruction and decline lead
  to a better result, so that we somehow gain though our very loss.
     To the objection which could be offered, moreover, that if this were so,
  the world should long since have become a paradise, there is an answer near
  at hand. Although many substances have already attained great perfection,
  yet because of the infinite divisibility of the continuum, there always remain
  in the abyss of things parts which are still asleep. These are to be aroused
  and developed into something greater and better and, in a word, to a better
  culture. And hence progress never comes to an end. 365
Leibniz never comes out and explicity says that the world will be restored to
its prelapsarian state or that every created thing will eventually be saved. He
was, after all, trying to create consensus in an age of bitter sectarian conflict,
and such opinions smacked too much of radicalism. As D. P. Walker has
shown, even people who denied the eternity of hell were not sure it should
be broadcast to the lower classes, for whom the threat of hell was thought
to be the only certain stimulus to virtue. 366 But the ideas of progress and
perfectionism are to be found liberally scattered through Leibniz's writings,
134    Chapter Six

especially after 1697, largely because of the influence of van Helmont. In his
Theodicy, Leibniz categorically denies that God could predestine anyone to
damnation. He takes the same position as van Helmont and Lady Conway
that divine punishment is an act of redemption not retribution. Once again he
uses the alchemical and Christian image of the seed that disintegrates before
it can germinate:
  ... God wills antecedently the good and consequently the best. And as for
  evil, God wills moral evil not at all, and physical evil or suffering he does
  not will absolutely. Thus it is that there is no absolute predestination to
  damnation; and one may say of physical evil, that God wills it often as
  a penalty owing to guilt, and often also as a means to an end, that is, to
  prevent greater evils or to obtain greater good. The penalty serves also
  for amendment and example. Evil often serves to makes us savour good
  the more; sometimes too it contributes to a greater perfection in him who
  suffers it, as the seed that one sows is subject to a kind of corruption before
  it can germinate: This is a beautiful similitude which Jesus himself used. 367
What is even more interesting, however, is that Leibniz takes the extremely
radical step in the Theodicy of suggesting that one does not have to believe
in Jesus Christ to be saved. This was one of the opinions that had landed van
Helmont in the dungeons of the Roman Inquisition in 1662. 368 That Leibniz
could say such a thing openly fifty years later shows how much the religious
climate had changed in the intervening years:
   ... I would be rather on the side of those who grant to all men a grace
  sufficient to draw them away from evil, provided they have a sufficient
  tendency to profit by this succour, and not to reject it voluntarily. The
  objection is made that there has been and still is a countless multitude of
  men, among civilized peoples and among barbarians, who have never had
  this knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ which is necessary for those
  who would tread the wonted paths to salvation ...
       ... Supposing that to-day a knowledge of Jesus Christ according to the
  flesh is absolutely necessary to salvation, as indeed it is safest to teach,
  it will be possible to say that God will give that knowledge to all those
  who do, humanly speaking, that which in them lies, even though God must
  give it by a miracle. Moreover, we cannot know what passes in souls at
  the point of death; and if sundry learned and serious theologians claim
  that children received in baptism a kind of faith, although they do not
  remember it afterwards when they are questioned about it, why should one
  maintain that nothing of a like nature, or even more definite, could come
  about in the dying, whom we cannot interrogate after their death? Thus
  there are countless paths open to God, giving him means of satisfying his
                                                    Leibniz's Theodicy    135

  justice and his goodness: and the only thing that may allege against this is
  that we know not what way he employs; which is far from being a valid
  objection. 369
Leibniz's vision was truly ecumenical. It was also truly modern in the sense
that in evaluating the ethics of an individual he looked at his intentions and
actions rather than his formal beliefs.
                               CHAPTER SEVEN

              Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah

In an extremely interesting and insightful article Lois Frankel points out
that it is difficult for the modern reader to comprehend Leibniz's concept
of causation because we use different models which ultimately derive from
Hume. We reject metaphysical, non-mechanical causal connections and tend
to define causal relations in non-causal terms. As Frankel says, "the contemporary theorists seek formulas to determine when causation obtains, not an
understanding of what causation is.'0370 Where we tend to think of causation
in terms of a relation between events, philosophers in earlier centuries viewed
causation in the much broader terms of the qualities, essences, and powers of
substances acting upon each other on different levels of ontological reality.
Thus, for Leibniz, God acts in one way, monads in another, and physical bodies in still another way. Yet, as Frankel points out, all these different forms of
interaction are analogous, a point we will come back to.
   In the case of God, Leibniz employs two models of causation: emanation
and volition. The emanation model is a basic aspect of Platonic, neoplatonic
and kabbalistic theory, according to which God created the universe through
a process of emanation, or radiation, without diminishing his essence in
any way. In this theory of causation a higher form, or idea (to use Plato's
terminology), provides the model or mirror from which the various effects
take their being. Causation of this kind is often described in metaphors of
flowing fountains, mirrors, or fulgurations of light. As we saw in chapter
three, Leibniz uses this last metaphor in section 47 of the Monadology:
  Thus God alone is the primitive unity or the first simple substance; all
  created or derivative monads are products, and are generated, so to speak,
  by continual fulgurations of the divinity from moment to moment, limited
  by the receptivity of the creature, to which it is essential to be limited.
In using an emanation model of creation, Leibniz's philosophy displayed the
very pantheism he took great pains to refute, especially in the case of Spinoza.
If everything ultimately emanates from God, how can one distinquish between

                               Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah        137

the creator and the creatures? As Friedmann has pointed out, Leibniz was no
more able to resolve this problem than any other philosopher subscribing
to emanationism. 371 His philosophy reflected the kind of spiritual monism
characteristic of Gnosticism in general and the Lurianic Kabbalah and van
Helmont in particular.
   Although Leibniz employed the emanation model, according to Frankel
"the basic model of Leibnizian causation" is that of volition. 372 This model
appears throughout his writings, from the earliest to the latest. For example,
in a letter to Thomasius in 1669, Leibniz says, "mind is the principle of all
motion, as Aristotle rightly saw.,,373 In the New Essays he says much the same
thing: "I still agree with you, though, that the clearest idea of active power
come~ to us from the mind. So active power occurs only in things which are
analogous to mind, that is, in entelechies; for strictly matter exhibits only
passive power.,,374 The clearest statement of the volition model of causation
applied to God appears in section 48 of the Monadology:
   God has power, which is the source of everything, knowledge, which
   contains the diversity of ideas, and finally will, which brings about changes
   or products in accordance with the principle of the best. 375
Because souls or minds are "images of the divinity... each mind being like a
little divinity in its own realm," they act analogously to God:
  And these [i.e. power, knowledge, and will] correspond to what, in created
  monads, is the subject or the basis, the perceptive faculty and the appetitive
  faculty. But in God these attributes are absolutely infinite or perfect, while
  in the created monads or in entelechies ... they are only imitations of it, in
  proportion to the perfection that they have. 376
This passage is especially interesting because it seems to contradict what
Leibniz repeatedly says elsewhere, namely that monads have no effect on
one another. Did Leibniz intend this to mean that there can be no interaction
between monads, or simply no physical interaction? He seems to say the
latter in a passage from his commentary on Wachter's Elucidarius (1706).
Here he suggests that there is a kind of moral, though not physical, interaction
between monads. I have highlighted the passage where this idea is expressed
most clearly:
  I say that the soul acts spontaneously and yet like a spiritual automaton; and
  that this is true also of the mind. The soul is not less exempt than the mind
  from impulses from external things, and the soul no more than the mind
  acts determinately; as in bodies everything is done by motions according
  to the laws of force, so in the soul everything is done through effort or
  desire, according to the laws of God. The two realms are in harmony. It is
  true, nevertheless, that there are certain things in the soul which cannot
138    Chapter Seven

  be explained in an adequate manner except by external things, and so far
  the soul is subject to the external; but this is not a physical influx, but
  so to speak a moral one, in so far, namely, as God, in creating the mind,
  had more regard to other things than to it itself. For in the creation and
  preservation of each thing he has regard to all other things. 377
Leibniz combines the emanation and volition model in section 15 of the
Discourse when he describes creation in terms of the emanation of divine
thoughts:
  After having seen, in some way, what the nature of substances consists in,
  we must try to explain the dependence they have upon one another and
  their actions and passions. Now, first of all, it is very evident that created
  substances depend upon God, who preserves them and who even produces
  them continually by a kind of emanation, just as we produce our thoughts.
  For God, so to speak, turns on all sides and in all ways the general system
  of phenomena which he finds it good to produce in order to manifest his
  glory, and he views all the faces of the world in all ways possible, since
  there is no relation that escapes his omniscience. The result of each view of
  the universe, as seen from a certain position, is a substance which expresses
  the universe in conformity with this view, should God see fit to render this
  thought actual and to produce this substance. And since God's view is
  always true, our perceptions are always true; it is our judgments, which
  come from ourselves, that deceive us.
From this passage it appears that all created substances are essentially actualized thoughts of God. If we couple this idea with the principle of sufficient
reason, a basic concept in Leibniz's philosophy, another model of causality
emerges, the deductive model. According to the principle of sufficient reason, no event is purely contingent or accidental. It must have a sufficient
cause or reason to occur. The same rule applies to ideas or thoughts; every
thought must have an antecedent and a consequence built into it by its very
nature. This is the essence of Leibniz's complete-concept theory of substance,
according to which a substance contains all the predicates it will have from
its inception. Thus, in the deductive model of causation an effect is seen
as inevitably following logically, mathematically, or metaphysically from its
cause.
   How do these models apply to causation on a physical or bodily level?
Frankel offers an ingenious answer to this problem which avoids the perplexing question of whether Leibniz was a realist or phenomenalist. As she says,
Leibniz uses various models of causation for different levels of ontological
reality. The emanation and volitional model apply to God and to a lesser
extent to monads, while a mechanical model applies to physical bodies. But
                              Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah        139

as Frankel points out, all these models are analogous because at the basis of
them all is the volitional model. For example, when Leibniz speaks of "force"
in the physical world, he equates it with "conatus" or "striving", terms that
have a great deal in common with the notion that monads have "appetite" and
"desire." As Frankel says,
  Bodily motion and its cause are ultimately traceable to the will of God,
  and are described even at the finite level as analogous to volition. Leibniz
  equates mechanical "force" with "conatus" or "striving": it is the physical
  expression of the monadic appetition. 378
Frankel asks why Leibniz should have used so many disparate models of causation. She concludes that their use was a consequence of Leibniz's primary
goal of integrating theology and science into a harmonious whole. While the
volitional and emanation models were suitable for theology, the mechanical
model had proven eminently useful for explaining the interaction between
bodies in the physical world. However, the mechanical model was inherently
dangerous in Leibniz's view because in its Cartesian version it postulated
a radical dualism between matter and spirit which could lead to total materialism, as it had in the case of Hobbes. Thus, instead of positing totally
different kinds of causation for different ontological levels, Leibniz's models
are analogous:
  The concepts of causation and action are applied to God, finite spirits,
  and bodies analogously, rather than univocally... divine causation is pure
  volition, which is universally efficacious. That is, an omnipotent being
  need only will a state of affairs in order to bring it about. God is also
  sometimes described as acting in an emanative fashion, as when Leibniz
  writes that "the created substances depend on God, who preserves them
  and indeed even produces them continually by a kind of emanation, as we
  produce our thoughts [Discourse 14]." Next in order of existence is the will
  of finite spirits. Finally, the least "noble" form of causation is mechanical
  causation, although ... even it has elements of volition. Endorsing the
  Platonic principle that "it would be absurd to make the less noble a pattern
  for the more noble," Leibniz employs hierarchical analogies from God to
  finite spirits to bodies. 379
Thus, according to Frankel's suggestive interpretation, the pre-established
harmony does not refer to two utterly distinct and incompatible realms; it
simply describes analogous modes of causation viewed from different perspectives:
  One role of the pre-established harmony... is to unite, by means of analogy,
  the disparate modes of action of God, finite minds, and bodies ... Leibnizian
  bodies follow laws of motion, which is the material analogue of monadic
140    Chapter Seven

  appetition. Further, monadic appetition is itself a finite analogue - perhaps
  one of the "vestiges" of God expressed in things 380 - of the divine will,
  which acts by emanation.
The following passage from a letter to Bayle (1687) gives additional support
to Frankel's interpretation. Here Leibniz emphasizes the essential unity of
theology and physics and describes true causation as volitional, not physical:
   ... true Physics may be tapped from the source of divine perfection. God
   is the final reason of things, and the knowledge of God is no less the
   principle of sciences than his essence and will are the principles of beings.
   The most reasonable philosophers remain agreed on this, but there are
   very few of them who are able to make use of it in order to discover
   truths of consequence. Perhaps these small samples will arouse some to
   go much farther. Philosophy is sanctified by having its streams flow from
   the fountain of God's attributes. Very far from excluding final causes and
   the consideration of a being acting with wisdom, we must from these
   deduce everything in Physics. That is what Socrates in Plato's Phaedo
   admirably well observed in arguing against Anaxagoras and other philosophers who were too materialistic. They, after recognizing an intelligent
   principle above matter, when they come to philosophize about the universe, instead of showing that this intelligence makes everything for the
  best (and that this is the reason of things: that it has found it good to
  produce things in accordance with its ends), try to explain everything by
  the sole concourse of particles, thus confusing conditions or instruments
  with the true cause. It is as if (Socrates says), in order to explain why I
  am sitting in prison awaiting the fatal cup and why I am not on my way to
  live among the Beotians or other people among whom everybody knows
  I might have been able to save myself, one were to say that the reason is
  that I have bones, tendons, and muscles which can be flexed in the way
  necessary for me to be sitting. By my faith (he says), these bones and these
  muscles would not be here and you would not see me in this posture, if
  my mind had not judged that it is more worthy for Socrates to submit to
  what the laws of the country order. This passage in Plato deserves to be
  read in its entirety for it contains very beautiful and very solid reflections.
  However, I agree that the particular effects of nature can and ought to be
  explained mechanically, without forgetting still their admirable ends and
  uses, arranged by Providence, so that the general principles of physics and
  of Mechanics itself depend on the conduct of a sovereign intelligence and
  cannot be explained without having it enter into our consideration. It is
  thus that we must reconcile piety with reason, and that will enable us to
  satisfy people of good standing who have some apprehension about the
  consequences of the mechanical or corpuscular philosophy as though it
                              Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah        141

  might alienate them from God and immaterial substances, whereas with
  the required corrections and everything well understood, that philosophy
  should lead us to them. 381

Frankel's discussion of Leibnizian causation offers an Ariadne's thread
through the labyrinth of the continuum between physical bodies and spiritual
monads; physical bodies are monads, simply viewed from a different perspective and situated on a different ontological plane. Ihis, in tum, strengthens
my contention that Leibniz was neither a realist nor a phenomenalist, but a
gnostic monist.
    Emily Grosholz has suggested a similar solution to the problem of whether
Leibniz was a realist or phenomenalist. She also thinks that one must interpret
Leibniz's philosophy in terms of different levels of reality, and she also
associates these levels with different perspectives. Her discussion is extremely
helpful because perspective is something Leibniz was very much concerned
with. He often speaks of monads as mirroring the universe from their particular
perspectives, and he draws an analogy between the way individual monads
view the universe and the different perspectives one may have of a city, which
can be seen from many different points of view yet remains one and the same
city.382
    There is a great deal of further evidence in Leibniz's writings to support
Frankel's contention that volition was the primary model Leibniz employed
to explain causation. By examining this evidence more closely, we shall see
once more how indebted Leibniz philosophy was to the mix of neoplatonic,
hermetic, and kabbalistic thought characteristic of Renaissance occultism
and present in the work of Francis Mercury van Helmont. Their roots in
this common tradition clearly provided the basis for their friendship and
collaboration on van Helmont's last book.
    In chapter three, I followed Pagel's lead in suggesting the very important
ways in which Leibniz's concept of monads was similar to the elder van
Helmont's view of matter. In this chapter, specifically devoted to Leibniz's
theories of causation, the ideas of the elder van Helmont are again relevant.
The troubling question of how form could effect body, or spirit matter, which
eventually led Leibniz to his theory of pre-established harmony, had led
the elder van Helmont to a remarkably similar idea at an earlier date. He
too denied that matter and spirit could mutually interact. The younger van
Helmont agreed. Both father and son were convinced that any change that
occurs when two or more bodies appear to interact results from the interaction
of the archei, which, because they are not material, act on each other through
ideas. The example the elder van Helmont gives to explain this interaction
between archei is of a man who thrusts his hand into a pail of pitch. He denies
that the man's hand becomes black because the material particles of pitch
142    Chapter Seven

stick to it but attributes the blackness to the influence of the archeus of the
pitch on the archeus of the hand:
   So it is altogether necessary, that he which toucheth Pitch should be defiled
   by it: That is, it behoveth the Archeus himself, primarily, and immediately
   to conceive, and put on that new Image, to be affected with the same, and
   by virtue of a resembling mark or Symbole, other things depending on
   him, according to the properties of the hurtfull idea. 383
Although the elder van Helmont denied that spirit and matter could interact,
he postulated innumerable intermediaries between the two to explain their
interaction. I quote Pagel's discussion of these "psycho-physical agents" freely admitting that I do not fully understand the differences between thembut they suggest to me precisely the kind of distinctions Leibniz attempted to
draw between "primary entelechy" "primary matter," "the complete monad,"
"mass," and "corporeal substance," which were so confusing to De VoIder:
   To separate and specify the hierarchy of psycho-physical agents that form
   the individual object is a somewhat artificial undertaking which van Helmont nevertheless attempted ... He distinguished (1) the odours. These are
   capable of penetrating and of transmitting (2) the images - the directional
   plans, "blue-prints" of structure and function. The ferments (3) join odour
   to image and inform matter. The gas (4) is the ready-made object in a
   volatile state, "disposed" matter. The archeus (5) is gas of a higher grade,
   informed by luminous aura and splendour. Lastly the semen (6) of sexual
   generation contrasts with the "naked" ferment of spontaneous generation;
   it is an organism in miniature endowed with ferment, image, and odour,
   the "dispositional knowledge of things to be done," and the archeus. 384
What I am trying to show here is that however much both J. B. van Helmont
and Leibniz wished to separate matter and spirit, they also tried to understand
and explain their obvious interaction. Leibniz's theory of pre-established
harmony should have settled the issue, but did it? I cannot help finding in
his discussion of preformation, in his insistence that every entity, even a
supposedly dead one, exists in conjunction with a "subtle" body, and in his
conception of monads as both active and passive, the old Renaissance attempt
to "reify" the immaterial (and vice versa) to use Brian Vickers' felicitous
phrase. 385
   In J. B. van Helmont's universe all the basic units of matter are endowed
with perception, and some even possess sense and intellect. Pagel describes
this concept of matter in a way that underlines its similarity to Leibniz's:
"In other words, the world consisted of enmattered psychoid impulses that
were intrinsic, rather than superadded to matter.,,386 Pagel's use of the word
"psychoid" is suggestive, for while many scholars have remarked on the
                               Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah        143

"pansychism" characteristic of Leibniz's monadology, few have looked for
the source of this in the thought of the two van Helmonts.
   In his youthful treatise Hypothesis Physica Nova (1671) Leibniz made
what Pagel describes as "a somewhat surprising application of fermentation
to cosmology." In doing this, he essentially borrowed van Helmont's concept
of ferments as one of the activating forces in matter. According to Leibniz's
proposed theory a sort of divine ether penetrates earthy matter and becomes
enclosed in bullae, which then become the semina of things and determine
their properties. Pagel suggests that Leibniz was attempting to "mechanize"
van Helmont. 387 I mention this because although Leibniz did not know it, van
Rosenroth included this treatise in his German edition of Thomas Browne's
works. 388 Obviously both von Rosenroth and the younger van Helmont appreciated Leibniz's ideas at an early stage in his career, undoubtedly because of
their shared assumptions.
    As we have seen, in both the Discourse and the Monadology Leibniz
describes substances as the actualized thoughts of God. But this is not all.
Leibniz also subscribed to the idea that each substance or individual was
a microcosm of the larger world, or macrocosm, an idea at the heart of
Renaissance occult philosophy and one which provided the foundation for
the widespread belief in sympathetic magic. As we saw above, in section 83
of the Monadology Leibniz describes souls or minds as "images of divinity...
each mind being like a little divinity in its own realm." The same idea appears
in section 16 of the Discourse, " ... every person or substance is like a small
world expressing the large world ... " Individual substances are therefore both
actualized thoughts of God and microcosms reflecting every other actualized
thought of God to the best of its ability. It thus appears that the created world
is essentially the mind of God refracted in an infinite number of microcosmic
mirrors, and that the connection between these refractions is akin to the
connection between one thought and another; for the very fact that one monad
has a thought or perception implies that all other monads must have thoughts
that conform to this thought.
   Section 15 of the Discourse takes this idea a step further by describing
the interaction between substances in terms of their greater or lesser ability
to "express" themselves. As the title to the section says, "The Action of One
Finite Substance on Another Consists Only in the Increase of Degree of Its
Expression Together with the Diminution of the Expression of the Other,
Insofar as God Requires Them to Accomodate Themselves to One Another."
What strikes me about this passage is the use of the word "expression" and
the association this word has with thought in general and speech in particular.

  But, without entering into a long discussion, in order to reconcile the
  language of metaphysics with practice, it is sufficient for now to remark
144    Chapter Seven

   that we ascribe to ourselves - and with reason - the phenomena that
   we express most perfectly and that we attribute to other substances the
   phenomena that each expresses best. Thus a substance, which is of infinite
   extension insofar as it expresses everything, becomes limited in proportion
   to its more or less perfect manner of expression. This, then, is how one can
   conceive that substances impede or limit each other, and consequently one
   can say that, in this sense, they act upon one another and are required, so to
   speak, to accommodate themselves to one another. For it can happen that
   a change that increases the expression of one diminishes that of another.
   Now, the efficacy a particular substance has is to express well the glory of
   God, and it is by doing this that it is less limited. And whenever something
   exercises its efficacy or power, that is, when it acts, it improves and extends
   itself insofar as it acts. Therefore, when a change takes place by which
   several substances are affected (in fact every change affects all of them),
   I believe one may say that the substance which immediately passes to a
   greater degree of perfection or to a more perfect expression exercises its
   power and acts, and the substance which passes to a lesser degree shows
   its weakness and is acted upon.

It seems to me that implicit in this passage is an echo of very ancient theories
about the creative power of thought - particularly when expressed in music
or speech - theories which were revived in the Renaissance and provided
the basis for the many attempts to discover or create a "natural" language.
I may be reading too much into this one passage, but if it is taken together
with the previously cited passages describing creation as the actualization of
divine thought, and if it is placed in the context of Leibniz's life-long interest
in the creation of a universal character, there is ample evidence to show that
Leibniz was fully cognizant of these ancient theories and that they provided
the foundation for his volitional model of causation. As I have discussed the
concept of a "natural" language and the theories about sounds and images
from which it developed at length elsewhere,389 I will only refer briefly to
the subject in connection with some of the new ideas that have occurred to
me as a result of reading Frankel's article.
    In 1667 Leibniz mentions reading van Helmont's Kurtzer EntwurfJ des
eigentlichen Naturalphabets der heiligen Sprache (Short Sketch of the Truly Natural Alphabet of the Holy [Hebrew] Language).390 In this book van
Helmont employs kabbalistic arguments to prove that Hebrew was the divine
language used by God to create the world. This idea originates, of course, in
the Old Testament, where sound is a powerful creative force. God's words
assail the chaos and rush over it; they are "sent," they "come," they "abide."
When God said, "Let there be light," there was light; and Psalm 103 clearly
credits creation to divine speech: "by the word of the Lord were the heavens
                               Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah         145

made; and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth." The creative power
of God's word was reinforced by the prologue to the fourth Gospel, where
Christ is designated as the logos, through whom the world is created. The
belief that thoughts, words, or sounds were capable of having concrete, physical effects was commonplace during the Renaissance and seventeenth century,
especially among Christian-Kabbalists, who discovered an even richer source
for these ideas in the Sefer Yezirah (Book of Creation), a small treatise written
in Palestine between the third and sixth centuries A.D. and commented upon
frequently by later Jewish and Christian Kabbalists.
   The anonymous author of the Sefer Yezirah considered the letters of the
Hebrew alphabet building blocks with which God had constructed the universe. He divided the letters into various "groups," "roots," or "gates" and
describes how they were arranged on a sphere and rotated in a way that led
to the creation of every existing thing. One of the treatises von Rosenroth
gives prominence to in the Kabbala Denudata depends heavily on the Sefer
Yezirah. Entitled the Valley of Kings, it was written by Napthali ben Jacob
Bacharach, a sixteenth-century Lurianic Kabbalist. Following the Sefer Yezirah, Bacharach describes the Hebrew letters as the "building blocks" of the
universe. Even man was created through the letters. Since man was formed
in the image of God, it should come as no surprise that when God's name,
YHWH (the tetragrammaton), is written vertically, the stick figure of a man
emerges.

Bacharach brings out the magical implications implicit in the Sefer Yezirah s discussion of the Hebrew alphabet by including in his own treatise a
recipe for making a three-year-old heifer by manipulating letters in certain
prescribed ways.391 Hayyim Vital, another Lurianic Kabbalist whose work
is well-represented in the Kabbala Denudata, describes how pious men can
create angels and spirits through prayers: "if a just and pious man applies
himself to the law and prays with attention, from the utterances going forth
from his mouth, angels and sacred spirits will be created, who will always
last and persist.,,392
   The belief that Hebrew had been the language of creation implied that
it was a language in which words and things were one and the same, and
that, to quote von Rosenroth's laudatory preface to van Helmont's book, "no
146    Chapter Seven

other language in the world agrees with [nature] so well as Hebrew.,,393 Von
Rosenroth offers the case of Adam naming the animals as proof:
   To prove this, nothing can serve better than the example of our first father
   Adam, when he gave all the animals their names. He must have found that
   he was able to represent all the internal movements of his understanding in
   an orderly and clear way through a certain alteration of his voice and tone ...
   Because an actual part of all the animals which he saw before him became,
   so to speak, a part of his own inward condition, and his words were able to
   imitate exactly this inward state, it therefore must follow that his language,
   which was Hebrew, was able to copy most exactly the essential nature of
   all animals as well as of other things. Where can one find another language
   of which one can prove the like with such happy certainty?394           .
The belief that words encapsulated the essential nature of things explains why
the study of philology and etymology was thought by many to be tantamount
to science.
   Van Helmont contended that each of the Hebrew letters in his "natural"
alphabet expressed certain specific qualities and characteristics, both in terms
of its written shape and its sound, and that when these letters were combined
into words, they perfectly expressed the nature of the thing designated. One
had only to dissect a word in terms of its written shape and spoken sound to
grasp the essence of the thing signified. The most comprehensive example
he gives to show this is his discussion of the name Aelohim (van Helmont's
spelling). He maintains that the shape and sound of each individual Hebrew
letter contribute qualities and characteristics which, when taken together,
perfectly describe God:
  At present we will search out the meaning of the wordAelohim ... EI imports
  Vertue or Strength for N signifies Infiniteness or Multitude. ') or L, is a
  Letter form'd with a topping Eminence in Writing, and in pronouncing is
  framed by an Elevation of the Tongue, and therefore signifies high Vertue
  or Power, and accordingly is the common Termination of the Names of
  Angels, as Michael, Gabriel, etc. 0 is the highest Sound, and therefore
  Cholem is placed on the tip of the Letter. As for i1 He, it is, and denotes
  Respiration, Breath, Life, Vegetation or Growth, Fruitfulness, the Air and
  Heavenly Influence, and therefore was vouchsafed to Abram and his Wife
  Sarai... so that from thenceforth he was no more to be called Abram, but
  Abraham; and she no longer Sarai, but Sarah; and according to what is
  there added, this Change was to signifie to him, that God had appointed him
  to be the Father of many Nations. Whence it appears, that 0, H hold forth
  to us a sublime exalted Life, Fruitfulness and Vegetation or Growth: But as
  far as I, the same hath a Sharp or Shrill Sound, and signifies the strong Life,
                               Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah         147

  that produceth the manly Member; while on the other hand, M denotes a
  Mother, the Womb, and the multiplicity of Births: for by its comprest and
  stifled Sound, from a shut Mouth (as appears in the pronouncing of this
  Letter) the Conception of Births is plainly represented to us: From all
  which we understand, that Aelohim is the Creator, who by his most exalted
  Infinitely diffused, Vital, Vegetant, and Generating Vertue, conceived all
  things from eternal Seeds, hidden in himself, and at length produced and
  sent forth the same out of himself, with multiplicity and distinction. 395
What is remarkable about this passage is that it comes from the book Leibniz
wrote in van Helmont's name, Thoughts on Genesis.
   Neither van Helmont nor Leibniz evade the magical implications of this
theory that language is full of creative power. Not only are Hebrew words
identical to the things they describe, but the articulation of these words creates
the things. The most obvious example to prove this was, of course, the passage
where Adam names the animals referred to above. In van Helmont's last book
this passage is discussed and interpreted metaphorically. The animals did not
exist apart from Adam until he named them; before that time they were simply
ideas in his mind: "For all Things were placed within him." Adam is therefore
the microcosm in which the macrocosm is reflected. By imposing names on
the thoughts in his mind, he brought the animals into physical existence,
"because to call Things by their Names, is to give them their Nature.,,396
We have already seen how Leibniz described creation in terms of divine
volition and thought. In Thoughts on Genesis this process is described as
the expression of thought through speech. While God has this power to the
fullest, man also shares it:
  From efficacious thinking, within himself, whereby Aelohim doth conceive
  things, and we also conceive Images and Ideas, there proceeds a word of
  the Mind from the Party thinking, or a power tending to an object; and
  by this going forth of the Mind, an Object is made and fixed: And last of
  all, it is call'd by name, that is, it receives an absolute and determinate
  Nature. 397
Perhaps to protect themselves against the charge of magic or heresy, van
HelmontlLeibniz is quick to add that although men retain a vestige of this
power, it had been significantly weakened by the Fall. A sorry contrast is
drawn between the splendid spectacle of divine creation by fiat with man's
postlapsarian method of propagation:
  no sooner had God said, Let there be light but the Light was; that is,
  Aelohim conceiving the Light in Thought, by a powerful Word of the
  Mind, and constituting to himself an object of thinking, into which he
  might send forth his inward Power, in so doing, I say, he outed or produced
148    Chapter Seven

   the same, and gave Existence to something separate from himself, and
   brought forth without himself. This Process illustrates the Nature of the
   Spiritual Conception and Birth; for in like manner, tho' in far inferior
   Degree, Adam also should have begotten and propagated his Posterity, in
   case he had not Fallen, and Coated himself with the gross earthly Shell. 398

The fact that Leibniz expressed similar ideas about God's power to create
merely by thinking, although in a much abbreviated form, in both the Discourse and the Monadology provides additional evidence that he was not
merely ghosting van Helmont's book out of kindness but shared many ofthe
same ideas.
    The volitional model of causation is clearly what is at issue here. Creation
is a process which began with thoughts in God's mind and ended with the
articulation of these thoughts. This explains why van Helmont and Leibniz
retranslate the first sentence of Genesis to read, "In the Head, Aelohim created
the Heavens and the Earth, instead of the usual "In the beginning," on the
seemingly plausible grounds that J1VNLl (beresith), the meaning of which
has always puzzled translators, could be amended to VNLl berosh (in the
head).
    These ideas about the creative power of language were not unique to the
Kabbalah; they also played a part in Renaissance Neoplatonism, Hermeticism, natural magic, and the celebrated art of Raymond Lull. Ficino, for
example, developed a form of spiritual magic in which he used words set to
music. Ludovico Lazarelli apparently took the demon-making passage from
the Hermetic Asclepius literally and believed that men still possessed the
power to make "divine souls.,,399 Together with the Kabbalah, these writings
provided the sources for van Helmont's and Leibniz's ideas about the creative
power of language. Frances Yates has established Leibniz's indebtedness to
Lull and the tradition of the Art of Memory in his own attempts to create
a universal character. 4oo Just like Leibniz's intended characteristica, the art
of Raymond Lull was both a memory system and a method for investigating
and discovering new truth. Lull based his art on the divine attributes of God,
which he seems to have identified with Platonic ideas, considering them both
the causes of creation and the abstract principles informing the created world.
In the most common form of his art, Lull designated the following nine divine
attributes with the letters B through K: Bonitas, Magnitudo, Eternitas, Gloria, Potestas, Sapientia, Voluntas, Virtus, Veritas. He placed these letters on
concentric circles, which the practitioner of his art was supposed to revolve
in such a way that he would understand any subject he wished to tackle.
The similarity between Lull's art and the description in the Sefer Yezirah of
the twenty-two Hebrew letters revolving with each other on spheres (more
probably circles) presents a very Lullist picture (or vice versa!). Pico was the
                                Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah         149

first to draw a parallel between the two practices. Many works were published
which purported to be based on the Kabbalah when they actually discussed
LuHist techniques and used Lullist figures, attributes, and notations. 401 Surely
there are ~choes of this kind of Lullist and kabbalistic letter mysticism behind
Leibniz's belief that all philosophy and physics can be derived from the divine
attributes:

   ... true Physics may be tapped from the source of divine perfection. God
   is the final reason of things, and the knowledge of God is no less the
   principle of science than his essence and will are the principles of beings ....
   Philosophy is sanctified by having its streams flow from the fountain of
   God's attributes. 402

While van Helmont's theory of Hebrew as a natural language had its source in
the various philosophies that made up Renaissance occultism, his theory was
unique in one important respect. Although he was convinced that Hebrew
had originally been the divine language of creation, he did not think this
true of contemporary Hebrew nor of scriptural Hebrew passed down to his
generation. While these forms were corrupt, van Helmont believed it was his
good fortune to have rediscovered Hebrew in its original, divine form. Such
was his "natural" alphabet, an alphabet based on pictorial representations of
the movements made by the tongue as each Hebrew letter was pronounced.
Thus letters are the intermediaries between thought and things; they are at
one and the same time both physical and spiritual. The moment a thought is
expressed in words it assumes some kind of physical existence, not only as
sound, but because every Hebrew word is formed from letters representing the
physical movement of the tongue. Language is therefore the bridge between
mind and matter. When von Rosenroth, van Helmont, and, perhaps, even
Leibniz looked at the diagrams of the Hebrew letters drawn by van Helmont
to accompany his treatise, they had additional proof that mind and matter
could not possibly be separated in the way Descartes argued it was. I say
"perhaps even Leibniz" because to my mind the link between mind and
matter via the Hebrew letters emphasized in both the Alphabet of Nature and
Thoughts on Genesis provided the basis for Leibniz's later statement to Bayle
that abstract reasoning is inseparable from the "characters" that represent
such reasoning:

  Everything which ambition or any other passion makes the soul of Caesar
  do is represented in his body as well, and the movements of these passions
  all come from impressions of objects joined to internal movements. The
  body is made in such a way that the soul never makes any resolutions
  to which the movements of the body do not correspond; even the most
150    Chapter Seven

   abstract reasonings play their part in this by means of the characters which
   represent them to the imagination. 403
Leibniz reiterates this same idea in Reflections on the Doctrine of a Single
Universal Spirit written in the same year, 1702. Here he maintains that thought
is always accompanied by some material traces and consequently that spiritual
and physical functions are always reciprocal and never separable:
   I find ... that there is never any abstract thought which is not accompanied by
   some images or material traces, and I have established a perfect parallelism
   between what happens in the soul and what takes place in matter. I have
   shown that the soul with its functions is something distinct from matter but
   that it nevertheless is always accompanied by material organs and also that
   the soul's functions are always accompanied by organic functions which
   must correspond to them and that this relation is reciprocal and always will
   be. 404
 I am not claiming that Leibniz accepted van Helmont's theory of Hebrew as a
natural language, simply that he shared enough of the same basic assumptions
to be willing to write a book explaining them in van Helmont's name. Leibniz
never relinquished the idea so basic to van Helmont, that names were "real."
He consequently rejected Hobbes' and Locke's nominalist theory oflanguage.
Leibniz's first criticisms of Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding
were written during the period that he was in closest contact with van Helmont
and may well have been stimulated by their discussions. Van Helmont knew
Locke and respected him.405
    Leibniz eventually rejected the idea that Hebrew was the original language
spoken by Adam. Although he continued to believe that such a language
had once existed, he did not think it was Hebrew but concluded that German
retained the most traces of this "lingua Adamica." According to Hans Aarsleff,
the height of Leibniz's interest in linguistic studies (as against his attempt to
create a universal character) began in 1697, the very year he wrote van
Helmont's last book. 406
    The year after writing van Helmont's book, Leibniz published a paper in
the Acta eruditorum entitled On Nature itself, or on the Inherent Force and
Actions of Created Things. This paper was occasioned by the controversy
between John Christopher Sturm and Gunther Christopher Schelhammer in
1697-98 over the suggestion made by Robert Boyle that the term "nature"
should be replaced by "mechanism.,,407 Taking the Cartesian position that
matter is inert and passive, Sturm argued that it was pagan and un-Christian
to attribute any inherent properties to matter; hence he sided with Boyle.
Leibniz, who was well on his way to his monadology at this point, demurred,
arguing that God endowed each thing with its own "form" or "force" at the
                              Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah        151

moment of creation. What is especially interesting is the precise terms in
which Leibniz makes this argument. Elaborating on Sturm's statement that
all motions occurring in the present are the result of the "eternal law" or
"volition and command" of God, Leibniz harks back to the idea that is so
central in Thoughts on Genesis, namely, that creation occurred through divine
fiat and that in naming creatures God gave them their natures:'
  Surely if nothing has been impressed upon creatures by that divine word
  producat terra, multiplicemini animalia, if things are affected after the
  command just as if no command had intervened, it follows - since some
  connection, either immediate or mediated by something, is necessary
  between cause and effect - either that nothing conforming to the command is now happening or that the command was valid only in the present
  and must always be renewed in the future. But the learned author rightly
  repudiates this view. If, on the other hand, the law set up by God does in
  fact leave some vestige of him expressed in things, if things have been so
  formed by the command that they are made capable of fulfilling the will of
  him who commanded them, then it must be granted that there is a certain
  efficacy residing in things, a form or force such as we usually designate by
  the name of nature, from which the series of phenomena follows according
  to the prescription of the first command. 408
Once again Leibniz suggests that action on a spiritual level occurs through
the "expression" of speech. In a later passage Leibniz explains what it meant
when God saw "it was good," a phrase which, as we have seen, he singled
out for explanation in Thoughts on Genesis:
   For it is nevertheless consistent that, just as the word fiat leaves behind
   it something permanent, namely, the persisting thing itself, so the word
   benedictio leaves behind it something in things no less wonderful - a
   fruitfulness or an impulse to produce their actions and to operate, from
   which activity follows if nothing interferes.409
What Leibniz is essentially doing in both these passages is to recast van
Helmont's kabbalistic theory that Hebrew names contain the essential nature
of the things they designate into the more linguistically and philosophically
acceptable theory that God creates things in such a way that their life history evolves from within. This became, of course, the essence of Leibniz's
monadology.
   All the attempts to discover or devise a "natural" language, including Leibniz's, come out of the kind of analogous thinking characteristic of Renaissance
occultism, in which representation is identified with reality and a sign with
the thing signified. The belief in the "real" nature of sounds and symbols
was not, however, the product of a pre-rational and pre-scientific thought
152    Chapter Seven

pattern, as Brian Vickers suggests,410 but a corollary of basic Platonic and
neoplatonic theories: first, that creation was a process of emanation from an
intelligible world of forms or ideas - a theory to which Leibniz subscribed, as
we have seen; second, that there is a basic harmony between nature and the
human mind and that consequently knowledge consists in remembering these
archetypal ideas; and third, that intuition is the highest form ofknowledge. 411
The Platonic view of the universe as a great chain of being, in which planets, angels, men, animals, plants, minerals and metals are linked together
in complex hierarchies of correspondences, encouraged the belief that every
existing thing is in some measure a symbol, or reflection, of something else.
This provided the foundation for the kind of analogous thinking characteristic of the period and characteristic of Leibniz's theories of causation. In this
system of correspondences, a symbol was more than a conventional sign; it
was a reflection of the highest order of reality and, as a reflection, or microcosm, it contained traces of the power and force of its prototype. The parallel
that Christians constantly drew between Scripture and the Book of Nature
also encouraged th! belief that there was an intimate connection between
language and things and that it was therefore entirely plausible to approach
things linguistically. The Platonic definition of knowledge as the remembering of ideas, togeth~r with the high value placed on intuition, reinforced the
notion that symbols were "real" and not conventiona1. Through the intuitive
understanding of a symbol, Neoplatonists like Marsilio Ficino believed they
could grasp the whole of a truth in an instant. When Ficino contemplated
the figure of the tail-eating serpent, or ouroboros, he thought he gained an
essential and intuitive understanding of what eternity really means. 412 The
same kind of thinking lay behind John Dee's exclamations of wonder when
he contemplated his Monas, a complicated hieroglyphic which he devised
in the belief that it embodied all the most important secrets of the natural
and supernatural world. 413 A similar way of thinking about symbols explains
von Rosenroth's fulsome praise of van Helmont's "natural" alphabet and his
belief that it provided the blue-print for utopia. As he says,

  If we examine the writings of the Old Testament, what do we find in them
  but a gold mine of all good arts and knowledge, and a treasure chest in
  which all the gems of philosophy, all the riches of the Divine Law, and
  what is most excellent, all the treasures of hidden divine and holy wisdom.
  I will not stop to consider that from this [source] the light of all chronology
  radiates, that in it one finds before his eyes a mirror of all virtues and vices,
  and that the true art of politics and skill in economics cannot be learned
  better and more thoroughly from any other book than this [one]. Much
  less am I able to point out what secrets both of nature and customs this
                               Causation, Language, and the Kabbalah          153

  miraculous book keeps concealed under the simple historical letters, not
  to mention the secret prophecies. 414
These theories, which were a stock part of Renaissance occultism, influenced
Leibniz, just as they did van Helmont. Leibniz believed as ardently as his
Renaissance predecessors in the possibility of a "real" character precisely
because he shared the same Platonic belief in an intelligible world of ideas
from which the material world of created things had emanated. The correspondence between ideas and things led him to the familiar notion that
all knowledge can be reduced to a number of simple ideas which could be
arranged logically and expressed in suitable signs. These signs would constitute a "real" character, and by means of their combination men would arrive
at a clear understanding of complex propositions. A mathematical model lay
behind Leibniz's thinking, but it is the kind of fanciful numerology more
characteristic of a Renaissance Neoplatonist or Kabbalist than the inventor of
infinitesimal calculus. To take Leibniz's own example: the proposition "man
is a rational animal" might be expressed symbolically as

     Man = Animal + Rational

or mathematically as

     6 = 3 x 2.

In either case one can see at once whether the proposition is true or false. 415
This kind of mathematical manipulation encouraged Leibniz to hope that
men would eventually resolve their differences by simple calculation. But
such calculation had nothing to do with genuine mathematics. It has more
in common with the kabbalistic practice of gematria, in which numbers are
substituted for letters. Leibniz was well aware of the various practices in
which numbers or letters were substituted for words and phrases by both
Kabbalists and Lullists. In his remarks on Wachter's book on Spinoza and the
Kabbalah, he specifically refers to these. 416
   Leibniz was not original in claiming that his characteristic could be used
to invent and discover, but the inventions he claims to have made as a result
of using it were certainly astonishing and, as at least one Leibniz scholar has
suggested, tax our credulity.417 Writing to Herzog Johann Friedrich, Duke of
Hanover, in October, 1671, Leibniz claims to have discovered the following
amazing array of inventions by means of his "combinary art":
  In mathematics and Mechanics I have by means of the Combinary Art found
  several things which in practical life are of no small importance: first of all,
  an arithmetic machine, which I call a Living Bank-clerk... of many uses in
  Business, military affairs, surveying, sine-tables and astronomy. Another
154    Chapter Seven

   instrument of mine, which I call a Living Geometer, mechanically - for
   nothing exists in nature otherwise than mechanically - provides a way
   to resolve all conceivable lines and figures ... In Optics I have first of all
   men discovered (1) a certain kind of tube or lens which I call Pandochas
   because it makes the whole object uniform ... (2) Catadroptic tubes, for in
   one tube are juxtaposed a mirror and perspective ... (3) a means, much
   sought until now, of measuring from a given position in perspective ...
   which I found through the Art of Combinations. In nautical things ... on
   procuring sufficient data from a few experiments ... I will demonstrate how
   to find longitudes completely, and provide a way for a person on a ship
   to know with certainty what his location is without the help of the sun,
   moon and stars which cannot always be observed (yet Huyghens' famous
   invention depends on them alone). In Hydrostatics I have restored the lost
   invention of Drebel that enables one to go with a ship under the surface of
   the water during a storm (for it is tranquil enough under water) or during
   an attack by sea"jobbers, and then to come up again; and this is what
   Mersenne wanted so much to do. In Pneumatics ... I have compressed air
   into a box 1000 times normal pressure which can exert terrific force on
   water ... like a canon shot. 418
The utopian visions 'that Leibniz's characteristica inspired in his mind were
no less grand than those inspired in van Helmont and von Rosenroth's minds
by the "natural" Hebrew alphabet. It is hardly surprising, then, that he called it
a "magia naturalis," a "Cabbala of the wise," and a "true key." Not only was it
miraculously effective but it would be easy to learn, requiring but a few weeks.
Van Helmont had made the same claim with the extraordinary statement that
he had taught a "deaf, weak-eyed, and trembling" musician to read and speak
Hebrew in two weeks by using the diagrams of his "natural" alphabet. 419
Paolo Rossi points out that such astonishing promises to teach everything in
a short time had been a standard aspect of Lullism and memory treatises for
the previous two centuries. 420 This only provides another example of how
indebted Leibniz was to earlier traditions, and this, in tum, explains why he
had so much in common with van Helmont.
                                Conclusion

Kant thought the idea of "slumbering" monads was unbelievably funny.421
Perhaps it is. But behind it lay the conviction that all things could change and
better themselves; and this, in turn, encouraged the humanitarian outlook and
activist philosophy that separates van Helmont and Leibniz from so many of
their contemporaries, contemporaries who loathed and feared the common
people and objected to any kind of progressive social policy on the grounds
that it would undermine the status quo.
   During the seventeenth century there was a revival of the Pelagian view
that man might save himself through his own efforts. In ways that may never
be fully understandable Luther's and Calvin's view of man as a lowly worm
so inextricably inured in sin that he could do absolutely nothing to mollify
God or to ensure his own salvation gradually gave way to the optimistic
idea that man was in charge of his own destiny as well as the world's.
The denigration of reason and exhaltation of faith so prevalent during the
Reformation was reversed in the eighteenth century age of Enlightenment.
The late seventeenth century is a crucial period in this transformation. Out
of the obscure and confusing mix of mystical, occult, and magical beliefs
that characterized so much of the thinking of the early modern period a
rationalist philosophy gradually emerged based on the conviction that man
was essentially good and reason a noble tool in the inevitable march of
progress. In a letter to L'Hospital, Leibniz confessed that Arnauld had accused
him of Pelagianism, but he quickly added that he had defended himself and
satisfied Arnauld on that point. 422 However, Leibniz's correspondence with
Arnauld ended long before the idea of progress and perfection entered into
his mature monadological scheme. As Wilson (and others) have pointed
out, Leibniz was as bad as Spinoza in being unable to hold sin against an
individua1. 423 This inability, which to me seems more of a virtue, is not really
so curious if one takes into account Leibniz's contact and collaboration with
van Helmont.

156    Conclusion

   The belief in the power and perspicuity of man arose in part from gnostic
sources - from alchemy, Hermeticism, Renaissance Neoplatonism, and the
Kabbalah. In different ways each of these philosophies preached the doctrine
of perfectionism and in so doing undermined the Christian emphasis on
man's fallen nature and the unique role of Christ as the only and external
source of his salvation. For the alchemist in a very real sense was Christ, the
Neoplatonist a powerful magus able to draw divine power into himself, and the
Kabbalist the link between God and his creatures. Alchemists, Neoplatonists,
and Kabbalists were each in their own way gnostic saviors responsible for the
salvation of the world. As the microcosm which contained the macrocosm,
they possessed the power to restore the world to its prelapsarian perfection. 424
   These were heady views which intoxicated some to the point of heresy,
blasphemy, or madness. Who can forget Giordano Bruno, burnt at the stake
as a Hermetic magus, or Paracelsus with his penchant for oracular, aphoristic,
or just plain crude and scurrilous statements, or even the Quaker James
Naylor riding into Bristol on the back of a donkey as adoring women threw
palm fronds in his path? But in the person of Francis Mercury van Helmont
such views took on a more human coloring. As he wandered the continent
in his brown Quaker garments, advising German princes on ways to help
the destitute in their war-tom lands and encouraging everyone he met to
practice charity and brotherly love, it is easy to forget that he was inspired
by kabbalistic and alchemical visions. Those who do remember have tended
to dismiss him as a genial crackpot. I hope this essay will do something
to dispel this impression. The sources of van Helmont's inspiration are no
more bizarre than those referred to by many would-be prophets today. The
difference lies in the age in which he lived and the uses to which he put
them. His vision was neither selfish nor exclusive. It looked forward to the
greatest good for the greatest number in an age when such a concept was just
beginning to be imaginable. Unlike modem fundamentalists and occultists, he
did not put his head in the sand and deny the value of the scientific enterprise,
while enjoying its fruits. He had no mental "index" but read, explored, and
investigated everything to the best of his ability. The world was a marvel to
him and the individuals he met along the way were his equals and brothers.
Because he appeared to live well with no visible means of support and had
so many friends, some people thought he really had discovered the secret
of transmutation and possessed the philosopher's stone. But the secret was
much simpler. What he possessed was an essential goodness and kindness
that won him friends in every walk of life. Just thinking about his good
qualities reduced Henry More to tears at one of their partings. Trying to hide
his embarrassment, More quipped that as a chemist van Helmont could draw
moisture from a flint.425 Is it any wonder that Leibniz should have been drawn
                                                               Conclusion   157
to a man so like him in his humanitarian outlook and enthusiasm for doing
good?
   In conclusion let me say that I am not suggesting the Leibniz's view of
the Kabblah was one of total acceptance or that van Helmont's kabbalistic
theories were the major influence on his thought. Leibniz criticized certain
kabbalistic ideas as lacking sufficient foundation or proof. But regardless
of his criticisms, a careful reading of the manuscripts shows that he took
the Kabbalah extremely seriously. While discussing and reflecting on van
Helmont's ideas, he tested, refined, and in some cases modified his own. As
van Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy filtered through Leibniz's acute mind,
its more fanciful, mythical, and mystical elements were rationalized and
oriented to the tastes of a more modem world. Van Helmont was the moon
to Leibniz's more powerful sun; but even this analogy is not quite correct
since not all the light came from the greater philosopher. But in righting the
historical record, perhaps the last word should be left to Leibniz:
  [Ilt is good to study the discoveries of others in such a way that allows us
  to detect the source of their inventions and to make them in some sense
  our own. And I wish authors would give us the history of their discoveries
  and the process by which they arrive at them. When they do not do this, it
  is necessary to try to guess in order to profit better from their work. 426
In this essay I have only tried to do what Leibniz suggests.
                                          Notes

Abbreviations
AK       Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Siimtliche Schriften und Briefe, ed. Deutsche Akademie
         der Wissenschaften. Darmstadt und Berlin: Akademie-Vedag, 1923 -. References
         are to series and volume.
G        Die Philosophischen Schriften von G. W. Leibniz, ed. C. I. Gerhardt, 7 vols (Berlin,
         1875-90), repro Hildesheim: Olms, 1962.
Grua     G. W. Leibniz: Textes inedits, ed. G. Grua, 2 vols. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
         France, 1948.
KD       Kabbala Denudata, tr. and ed. Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, 2 vols (Sulzbach,
         1677,1684), repro Hildesheim: Olms, 1974.
L        Gottfried Wilhem Leibniz: Philosophical Papers and Letters, tr. and ed. L. Loemker,
         2 vols. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1956.
LBr      389 Niederslichsische Landesbibliothek, Hanover, MSS Helmont
LH       Leibniz Handschriften in the Niederslichsische Landesbibliothek, Hanover

  1. The major recent exceptions are Carolyn Merchant, Anne Becco, and Bernardino Orio
     de Miguel, whose work will be discussed below.
  2. A term suggested by G. MacDonald Ross, Leibniz, p. 1: ..... Commentators have been
     positively embarrassed by the many quirkier aspects of Leibniz's philosophical work."
     On this subject also see D. Cook, "Den 'anderen' Leibniz verstehen."
  3. Ross, Clavis Universalis; Francis Bacon; Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic
     Tradition; The Art ofMemory; The Rosicrucian Enlightenment; Popkin, "The Religious
     Background of Seventeenth-Century Thought;" The Third Force in Seventeenth-Century
     Thought; Ross, "Occultism and Philosophy in the Seventeenth Century;" "Leibniz and
     Renaissance Neoplatonism;" Schaffer, "Occultism and Reason;" Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the Making ofModem Science; The Great Instauration; Pagel,
     Joan Baptista van Helmont.
  4. The Kabbala Denudata (Sulzbach, 1677, 1684) was the most comprehensive collection
     and translation of major Kabbalist texts published in Latin up to that time. The editors
     have received praise for their accuracy and erudition from no less an authority than
     Gershom Scholem in his entry on Knorr von Rosenroth in the Encyclopedia Judaica.
  5. Foucher de Careil, Leibniz... , p. 56.
  6. Ibid.: "On sent qu'elle [the Kabbalah] n'est pour lui qu'un objet de curiosite, comme
     beaucoup d'autres imaginations curieuses de son temps ou des si~cles passes ... Ce
     vigoreux penseur [Leibniz] ram~ne toutes ces doctrines it son syst~me propre. II n'en
     prend que ce qui s'accomode it lui."
  7. Russell, A Critical Exposition ofthe Philosophy ofLeibniz, preface to the second edition.

                                                                                  Notes      159
 8. Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz, p. x. For a similar view see B. Russell, A Criticial Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz; J. M. Child, The Early Mathematical Manuscripts
    of Leibniz, p. 11. This is essentially Cassirer's view in Leibniz' System. For modem
    subscribers to this view see Schrecker, ''The Unity of Leibniz' Philosophical Thought"
    and Nason, "Leibniz and the Logical Argument for Individual Substances."
 9. Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz, p. 14.
10. Quoted in Ross, Leibniz, p. 9.
11. Ibid., pp. 1-2.
12. See references in note 3.
13. R. W. Meyer, Leibniz and the Seventeenth-Century Revolution.
14. J. Baruzi, ''Trois Dialogues mystiques inedits de Leibniz;" "Leibniz. Avec textes in6dits."
15. D. Mahnke, "Die Rationalisierung der Mystick bei Leibniz und Kant."
16. "Sur I'aspect occultiste de Leibniz ... ce sujet n'a pas encore suscit6I'6tude approfondie
    qui'il m6rite (Friedmann, Leibniz et Spinoza, p. 235, note 2).
17. " ... on peut dire de lui qu'il est un Paracelse de la fin du xviie siecle qui aurait Mn6fici6
    de la discipline acquise par cent annres de science modeme" (Ibid., p. 233).
18. Knecht, La Logique Chez Leibniz.
19. L I: 12. Friedmann makes a similar point in Leibniz et Spinoza, p. 46 and passim.
20. "Je Ie surpris un jour lisant des livres de controverse; je lui t6moignai mon 6tonnement,
    car on me I'avait fait passer pour un math6maticien de profession, parce qu'il n'avait
    presque fait autre chose a Paris. Ce fut alors qui'il me dit qu'on se trompait fort, qu'il
    avait bien d'autres vues, et que ses meditations principals 6taient sur la thoologie; qu'il
    s'6tait appliqu6 aux matMmatiques, comme a la scolastique, c'est-a-dire seulement pour
    la perfection de son esprit et pour apprendre I'art d'inventer et de d6montrer, qu'il croyait
    d'y etre a1l6 a pr6sent aussi loin qu'aucun autre" (quoted in Friedmann, p. 42). He said
    much the same thing in a letter to the Elector Johann Frederick in 1679: "Je n'ai donc
    pas 6tudi6 les sciences matMmatiques pour elles-meme, mais a fin d'en faire un jour
    bon usage pour me donner du credit en avan~ant la pi6t6" (Ibid).
21. For Leibniz's indebtedness to Lull and the Herbom Encyclopedists see Loemker, "Leibniz and the Herbom Encyclopedists." On Leibniz's indebtedness to Lull see Yates, The
    Art of Memory, and Htlbener, "Leibniz und der Renaissance-Lullismus."
22. L I: 97.
23. M. Wilson, "Leibniz's Dynamics and Contingency in Nature."
24. Papineau, ''The Vis Viva Controversy."
25. "A New System of the Nature and the Communication of Substances, as well as the
    Union between the Soul and the Body," Journal des savants (June 27, 1695). L II: 740-1.
26. C. Wilson, Leibniz's Metaphysics: a historical and comparative study, p. 195.
27. Butts "Leibniz's Monads: A Heritage of Gnosticism."
28. Ibid., p. 51.
29. Ibid., p. 61.
30. Leibniz mentions the translation of Pisani in Nova Methodus Discendae Docendaeque
    Jurisprudentiae, 1667 (AK VI, 1: 300) and Alphabeti vere Hebraici in the same year
    (AK VI, 1: 283).
31. Leibniz described this meeting in a letter to Christian Philipp (AK I, 3: 442).
32. Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van Helmont: Bagatelle pour des Monades," p.
    120.
33. 15/25 February. AK I, 1: 235.
34. Loemker, "Leibniz and Boyle," pp. 249, 252.
35. Aiton, Leibniz: A Biography, p. 100.
36. Grua I: 91. This passage appears in a review Leibniz wrote in 1695 of An account ofW
    Penns travails in Holland and Germany, anna MDCLXXVIIfor the service ofthe Gospel
    of Christ... (London, 1695): "Car rien ne nous s~auroit mieux marquer les perfections

    divines que les beautes admirables qui se trouvent dans ses ouvrages. Je vois que la
     pluspart de ceux qui pretendent It une plus grande spiritualite, et particulierement les
    trembleurs, tachent de donner du degout pour les contemplations des verites naturelles.
    Mais It mon avis ils doivent faire tout Ie contraire s'il ne veulent entretenir nostre propre
     paresse ou ignorance <c'est en quoy je trouve Messieurs Helmont, Knorr, Morus et
    Poi ret plus raisonnables que la pluspart des autres, quoyque je ne veuille point autoriser
     plusieurs de leurs sentiment ou ils s'eloignent de L'Eglise> L'amour <veritable> est
    fonde sur la connoissance de la beaute de l' object aime. Or la beaute de Dieu paroist dans
    les merveilles des effects de cette cause souveraine. Ainsi plus on connoist la nature et
    les verites solides des sciences reelles, qui sont autant de rayons de la perfection divine,
    plus on est capable d'aimer Dieu veritablement..." The words in brackets [< >] signify
    insertions made by Leibniz.
37. "Some Observations of Francis Mer: Van Helmont... " British Library, Sloane MSS 530,
    9th observation.
38. For Leibniz's interest in alchemy, see Baruzi, Leibniz et l'organisation religieuse de
     la terre, pp. 209-13; Friedmann, Leibniz et Spinoza, pp. 135ff. For the letters between
    Leibniz and Schuller, see Stein, Leibniz und Spinoza, pp. 284-96.
39. Ross denies that this was a Rosicrucian society (Leibniz, p. 5) as Couturat suggested, La
    Logique de Leibniz, p. 131, note 3.
40. Ross, Leibniz, p. 5.
41. Letter to Christian Philipp (2/12 November 1680): "11 y a peu d'apparence que Ie jeune
    Helmont scache de faire la projection: je luy ay parle assez familierement il y a environ
    huit ans, et il a parle assez ingenument, pour me faire connoistre qu'il n'a rien de cette
    nature (A I, 3: 442).
42. AK I, 3: 260.
43. Journal de Trevoux (January, 1737), p. 6ff.; Ross, Leibniz, p. 5.
44. Vickers, "Analogy and Identity," p. 117.
45. Walker, The Ancient Theology.
46. Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition.
47. Schmitt, ''The Perennial Philosophy from Agostino Steuco to Leibniz."
48. For example, Leibniz distinguishes between a "Cabbala quaedam vulgaris" (0 VII:
     184) and a "cabala sapientium," which would be useful for his "calculus generalus" or
    "caracteristica" (0 VII: 49). Such a kabbalah would be a "cabale non chimerique" (A I,
    2: 168; 0 VII: 199) See Knecht, La logique chez Leibniz, pp. 31, 73,157, 354ff.
49. "Vous s~avez, Monsieur, mes principes qui sont de preferer Ie bien public It toutes les
    autres considerations, meme It la gloire et It l'argent" (0 III: 261).
50. Meyer emphasizes Leibniz's commitment to practical reforms and improvements (p.
    118ff and passim). So does Ross (Leibniz, p. 5ff).
51. "A Short Discourse of ye Motif and Manner of Creating in the Low Countries Monti di
    Pieta," London, Royal Society, Classified Papers, 1660--1740, xxiv, Collins, Oldenburg,
    Hooke, no. 47.
52. 0 III: 176: "11 a des opinions bien extraordinaires; avec tout cela je trouve qu'il a des
    tres bons senti mens pour la pratique, et qu'il seroit ravi de contribuer au bien general,
    en quoy it est entierement de mon humeur... "
53. Orua I: 105: " ... Chez moy la pierre de touche de la veritable lumiere est une grande
    ardeur pour contribuer autant qu'it est possible It la gloire de Dieu et au bien general.
    Et je trouve si peu de gens qui prennent cela It coeur que j'en suis etonne. J'ay fait
    mille fois des propositions de cette nature. Mais j'ay trouve ordinairement que les
    personnes qui vouloient passer pour les plus pieuses n'estoient que glace quand il
    s'agissoit veritablement de bien faire; se contentant de s'evaporer en belles paroles
    comme si Dieu se gagnoit par les ceremonies. Je trouve meme que peu de gens ont une
    veritable idee du bien. Je ne daigne de donner ce nom qu' a ce qui rend veritablement les
                                                                              Notes      161

    hommes plus parfaits, et la grandeur de Dieu plus connue; je trouve encor que ceux qui
    sont d'humeur sectaire ou schismatique, c'est-a-dire qui ont de l'eloignement pour ceux
    qui sont pleins de bonne intention, mais qui ne donnent pas justement dans leur opinion,
    ne s~auroient avoir ny la charite ny la lumiere dans sa veritable purete: il me semble que
    je reconnois que feu Mons. Labadie, feu Madlle de Bourignon, et William Penn avec
    ses confreres, ont eu ce defaut d'estre sectaires ou condemnatifs. Parmy les personnes
    qui ont des sentimens extraordinaires, je n'ay presque trouve que Mons. d'Helmont qui
    convienne avec moy par ce grand principle de la charite, et dans lequel faye remarque
    une veritable ardeur pour Ie bien, quoyque d'ailleurs nous ayons souvent des opinions
    bien differentes sur des matieres particulieres .
54. GIll: 261; L I: 16.
55. Baruzi, Leibniz et I 'organisation religieuse de la terre, p. 495ff.
56. G. Guhrauer, G. W. von Leibniz: Eine Biographie, I, pp. 118-9; cited in Daniel Cook,
    "Leibniz's Use and Abuse of Judaism and Islam," p. 3.
57. Coudert, "The Kabbala Denudata: Converting Jews or Seducting Christians."
58. Ross, Leibniz, p. 74.
59. G VII: 451: "Mon systeme... n'est pas un corps complet de Philosophie etje n'y pretends
    nullement de rendre raison de tout ce que d'autres ont pretendu d'expliquer. 11 faut aller
    par degres pour aller 11 pas seurs."
60. Popkin, "Leibniz and the French Sceptics."
61. L II: 775.
62. L I: 15 (Letter to Count Golofkin, 1712).
63. Ibid., p. 85.
64. Ross, Leibniz, pp. 26-7.
65. Spaeth wrote a letter to van Helmont thanking him for his gift of money and clothing and explaining his reasons for converting to Judaism (Hamburg, Staats- und Universitiitsbibliothek, Suppelex. ep., vi. 26). On SpaethIMoses Germanus, see Schoeps,
    Philosemitismus im Barock, p. 67ff. and Scholem, "Die Wachterische Kontroverse ... "
66. Ross, Leibniz, pp. 26-7.
67. Niedersiichsische Landesbibliothek, LBr. 389, f. 125: "Nil patre inferior jacet hic Helmontius alter,lQui junxit varias mentis et artis opes;/ Per quem Phythagoras et Cabbala
    sacra revixitjElausque potest qui dare cuncta sibi./Quod si Graja virum tellus, et prisca
    tulissentlSecula, nunc inter lumina prima foret." In a note Leibniz explains the reference
    to Elaus: "Hippias patria Elaus, professione philosophus, qui omnia quibus opus, manu
    sua elaborare poterat." Anne Becco suggests that this might have been written ironically,
    but the whole thrust of this monograph argues otherwise.
68. Becco, "Leibniz et Francois-Mercure van Helmont: Bagatelle pour des Monades;" "Aux
    Sources de la Monade: Paleographie et lexicographie leibniziennes;" Du simple selon
    G. W. Leibniz.
69. Foucher de Careil, Leibniz, pp. 64ff.
70. I have unfortunately not been able to obtain a copy of Orio de Miguel's PhD thesis, Leibniz y la tradicion teosofico-kabbalistica. Fr. M. van Helmont (Madrid, 1988), although
    I have read articles taken from it.
71. Among those who argue that Leibniz's system was complete by an early date (besides
    those cited in this article) see Couturat, "Sur la metaphysique de Leibniz;" Rescher, 'The
    Contributions of the Paris Period;" Poser, "Leibniz's Parisraufenhalt."
72. Aiton, Leibniz, p. 135.
73. Ibid., pp. 201-2.
74. Ibid., p. 14. But as Becco points out, Thomasius referred to the Cabbala and Agrippa in
    his discussion of the term "monadicus" ("Aux Sources de la monade," p. 290). In any
    case, thirty years is a long time to keep a word in mind. While Leibniz may indeed have

      remembered his old teacher's use of the word, this was probably the result of having his
      memory jogged by van Helmont.
 75. Aiton, Leibniz, p. 68; for the idea of a persisting vital center, pp. 35-6.
 76. Ibid., p. 194.
 77. Ibid. p. 196.
 78. Ibid., p. 191.
 79. L II: 591.
 80. Loemker, "A Note on the Origin and Problem of Leibniz's Discourse of 1686," pp.
      227-38.
 81. Garber, "Leibniz and the Foundation of Physics: The Middle Years," p. 104.
 82. Ibid., p. 91.
 83. Ibid., p. 28.
 84. Ibid., p. 37.
 85. Ibid., p. 99.
 86. Ibid., p. 72.
 87. Sleigh, Leibniz & Arnauld: A Commentary on their Correspondence, chapter 5, section
     3.
 88. Ibid" pp. 102-3.
 89. Ibid., p. 115.
 90. Aiton believes that Leibniz rejected phenomenology at the end of his life (Leibniz, p.
     325), but others scholars take the opposite position. For an overview of the subject
     from opposite points of view see Jolley, "Leibniz and Phenomenalism" and Adams,
     "Phenomenalism and Corporeal Substance in Leibniz."
 91. Hein, Journal of the History of Biology, (1972), p. 170.
 92. Wilson, Leibniz's Metaphysics, p. 81.
 93. Ibid., p. 2.
 94. Ibid., p. 158.
 95. Ibid., p. 194.
 96. Ibid., pp. 196-7.
 97. Quoted in Brown, Leibniz, p. 148.
 98. Wilson, Leibniz's Metaphysics, p. 160.
 99. Ibid., p. 185.
100. Ibid.
101. Ibid., pp. 161-2.
102. Ibid., p. 181 & note 77. Wilson also rejects the view of Carolyn Merchant that Anne
     Conway's philosophy could have influenced Leibniz on the grounds that he only read
     her work in 1696, which is again too late.
103. Ibid., p. 161.
104. Ibid., p. 188.
105. Ibid., pp. 188-9 (True Intellectual System, p. 830).
106. Ibid., p. 177 (True Intellectual System, p. 155).
107. Ibid., p. 189, note 104.
108. Ibid., p. 177.
109. H. Ritter, Geschichte der Philosophie., p. 4: "Unter den Vorgangem, welche man fUr die
     Leibnizische Monadologie aufsucht hat, ist er ohne Zweifel der, welcher dem deutschen
     Philosophen so wie personlich, so in seiner philosophischen Denkweise am nachsten
     stand."
110. R. W. Meyer, Leibniz and the Seventeenth-Century Revolution, pp. 62-4.
Ill. Marjorie Nicolson suggested this in the Conway Letters (p. xxvii).
112. Merchant, "The Vitalism of Anne Conway: its Impact on Leibniz's Concept of the
     Monad."
113. Nicolson, ed., Conway Letters, pp. 39ff.
                                                                              Notes     163
114. Coudert, "A Cambridge Platonist's Kabbalist Nightmare;" "A Quaker-Kabbalist Controversy."
115. In an unfinished letter to L'Hopital, 12122 July 1695, cited in A. Robinet, Malebranche
     et Leibniz: Relations personnelles, p. 319.
116. Merchant, "The Vitalism of Anne Conway," p. 262: "In much of her discussion of the
     essential spiritual vitality of the whole world, Anne Conway's thought converged with
     that of Leibniz, and she was for this reason held in high esteem by him."
117. Ibid., p. 269.
118. Part of Merchant's reason for writing her article was to put Lady Conway back into the
     historical record, from which Merchant thinks she has been unfairly excluded. While
     I agree that Lady Conway's work is worthy of scholary attention, I think the primary
     influence on her thought was van Helmont and consequently that van Helmont exerted
     the most direct influence on Leibniz, not Lady Conway. Merchant gives slightly more
     credit to van Helmont in her book but, in my view, still not enough: "It seems clear...
     that Leibniz appropriated the term monad from Conway and Van Helmont, its origins
     stemming initially from the Cabala. The influential role that Anne Conway's ideas played
     in his decision to use this concept has hitherto not been recognized, due to a series of
     scholarly errors originating from Heinrich Ritter's assumption that Van Helmont was
     the author rather than the editor of her Principles" (p. 267). Lady Conway's book is,
     however, basically an exposition of van Helmont's ideas.
119. Brown, "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle," p. 91.
120. In 1923 Walter Feichenfeld suggested that a short treatise by Henry More entitled ''The
     Fundamentals of Philosophy, or the Cabbala of the Eagle, the Boy, and the Bee... "
     included in the first volume of the Kabbala Denudata, was the ultimate source for
     Leibniz's monadology. This idea has been taken up more recently by Serge Hutin,
     "Leibniz a-toil subi l'influence d'Henry More?" Studia Leibnitiana 2 (1979): 59-72.
     Hutin made the error of crediting More with ideas that were really van Helmont's! See
     Brown, "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle,", pp. 77, 81. See also Coudert, "A
     Cambridge Platonist's Kabbalist Nightmare."
121. Brown argues that Leibniz only possessed the English version of Lady Conway's book
     and that his English was not proficient enough at that time to have read it. However,
     Aiton says that Leibniz could read English by October, 1676, although he probably
     could not speak it (Leibniz, p. 66). Van Helmont brought a copy of Lady Conway's
     manuscript with him in 1679, after Lady Conway's death. It is therefore conceivable
     that Leibniz could have read it when he met van Helmont in that year. Brown thinks that
     even in 1696 when Leibniz received a copy of the book, he could not have made much
     sense of it because he only had the English edition. However, Anne Becco has found
     Leibniz's Latin copy of the book with his annotations ("Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van
     Helmont,", pp. 124-25 and note 5), which means he had read it and presumably during
     van Helmont's visit to Hanover in 1694 or 1696, if not earlier. To my mind, whether
     or not Leibniz read Lady Conway's book is unimportant in as much as he had a living
     and talking source of kabbalistic ideas in van Helmont. It would not seem illogical to
     suppose than when van Helmont met Leibniz in 1679, he would have talked about his
     recently deceased friend and about her book and their mutual philosophy.
122. Brown, "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle," pp. 83-4.
123. Ibid., p. 93, note 44. Brown made this same point in Leibniz, pp. 95, 156.
124. Brown, Leibniz, p. 116.
125. Brown, "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle," p. 88.
126. Brown, Leibniz, p. 139.
127. Ibid., P 116. See also p. 145: ''The view, suppressed in the Discourse, that perhaps
     in metaphysical strictness there are no corporeal substances as such became, by 1690,
     his acknowledged opinion. But his thought about the composition of the continuum

      were taking him even farther in the direction of making his ultimate entities not merely
      non-material but non-spatial also."
128. Ibid., p. 147.
129. This was suggested by one ofthe anonymous reader's of the first draft ofthis monograph,
      who gave the example of George Keith. Like Leibniz, Keith collaborated with van
      Helmont on one of his books, the Paradoxal Discourses, but Keith later denied that
      he shared van Hemont's opinions. As 1 have shown in my PhD thesis and forthcoming
      book, The Impact of the Kabbalah in the Seventeenth Century: The Ufe and Thought
      of Francis Mercury van Helmont (E. J. Brill), Keith did share van Helmont's views; his
      repudiation of them came after the fact and was basically an attempt to substantiate his
      orthodoxy in the eyes of his fellow Quakers.
130. Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van Helmont," p. 137: "L'interet phitosophique de
      van Helmont se situe en fait au point central de I' oeuvre de Leibniz, par l'influence qu' it
      a eu entre 1694 et 1696, moment de de l'enracinement definitif du syst~me leibnizien."
131. Ibid., p. 141: ..... Ie r6le de van Helmont, r6le de reactivation d'un vocabulaire et
     de connaissances que Leibniz connaissait fort bien dans sa jeunesse... est si important ...
     Mais it s' agit de rationnaliser ces monadomagies ... C' est justement parce que la substance
      simple et la monade ont un lourd passe d'irrationnalite et d'atomisme que Leibniz ne
      se risque 1I,leur emploi que timidement, avant de les engager definitivement dans son
      vocabulaire... "
132. The latter position seems to be taken by R. C. Sleigh, Leibniz & Arnauld. A Commentary
     on their Correspondance, although 1 find the following statement ambiguous: "I believe
     that the conception of an individual substance brought to fruition in our texts [the
     correspondance with Arnauld] is essentially that of the Monadology. Still, there is a
     marked difference between our texts and the Monadology, bearing on the notion of
     substance" (p. 96).
133. Becco, "Aux sources de la monade," p. 279: ..... on ne peut plus voir dans Ie Discours une
     Monadologie autrement disposee. Car Ie theme meme de la simplicite de la substance,
     avec tout ce que cela implique sur Ie plan de l'ontologie leibnizienne y fait defaut. Certes,
     nous savions depuis tr~s longtemps que Leibniz n'y fait pas usage du mot "monade," dont
     on avait repere I' apparition dans les annees 1694-1696. Mais it fallait encore re¢rer que
     la monade n' est past une "substance": c' est une "substance simple." Or, dans Ie Discours,
     ou it n'est question que de substance individuelle, singuli~re, particuli~re, qualifications
     que nous ne trouvons pas dans la Monadologie, la simplicite de la substance n' est jamais
     evoquee. Son unite meme parvient pas 1I1'expression. Par sa "notion individuelle,"
     locution qui n' apparait pas dans la Monadologie, elle acquiert tout au plus la completude
     d'un etre reel. Par-del1l1a simple difference terminologique, c'est l'ensemble des th~mes
     monadologiques qui se marque au coin du "simple." La plus frappante des "insuffisances"
     monadologiques de Discours consiste dans la coupure du deroulement ontologique, car
     les ames des betes n'apparaissent ici que comme contre-champ negatif de la positivite
     rayonnante des esprits. En affinant les qualitees de la substance, Leibniz renverse peu 11
     peu Ie Discours de metaphysique, l' epure de la logique scolastique et l' emancipe de ces
     vestiges cartesiens."
134. Becco (Ibid.) follows W. Otto Saame (Der Satz vom Grund bei Leibniz. Mainz, 1961)
     in finding the first use of the word monad in a letter from Leibniz to L'Hospital (22 July
     1695).
135. See Becco, "Aux sources de la monade," p. 293, which does not mention Cusanus or
     Bruno as possible sources. For a further discussion of these earlier monodologies, see
     chapter 4.
136. Sleigh, Leibniz & Arnauld: A Commentary on their Correspondence, chapter 5, section
     3.
                                                                                   Notes     165

137. Becco, "Aux sources de la monade," p. 285: "Les sources cabbalistiques de Leibniz a cette epoque de la cristallisation terminologique de la "monade" meritent d'etre
     soigneusement prises en consideration."
138. To the 1697 edition of van Helmont's and von Rosenroth's translation of Boethius'
     Consolation of Philosophy.
139. "Leibniz und 'die physischen Monaden' von Fr. M. van Helmont," in Marchlewitz &
     Heinekamp, eds., Leibniz's Auseinandersetzung mit Vorgiingem und Zeitgenossen, p.
     149.
140. AK I, 1: 235. Letter to John Friedrich Schiitz von Holtzhausen (15/25 February 1672):
     "00. Sonste bitte M hh wolle sich doch ohnbeschwehrig ergundigen ob Herr Helmontius
     zu Wiirzburg sey, oder neulich da gewesen, oder wieder dahin kommen werde, oder wo
     er iezo sey." AK 1,1: 303. In a letter to Johann Christian von Boineburg (21 December
     1672) Leibniz says he knows that van Helmont is in England.
141. AK I, 3: 260: "00. j' ay appris que Monsieur Helmont y est apresent avec un nomme Monsr.
     Kohlhas qu' on fait passer pour adepte, ce qui veut dire dans Ie style des chymistes, faiseur
     de la pierre philosophaleoo. Et pour Monsr. Helmont on m'a dit qu'il est entierement
     Quacquerise, et qu'il ne se decouvre plus, quand il parle a des princes. J'ay de la peine a
     la croire, car lors que je luy parlay assez souvent et assez familierement il y a quelques
     8 ans, il me parut tout a fait raisonable, et depuis je l'ay fort estime. En effet c'est assez
     d'avoir este a l'epreuve de l'inquisition."
142. For a discussion of the Landgraf, see the articles by Raab in the bibliography.
143. Grua I: 94: "In Batavis mira nunc circa religionem et philosophiam eduntur studio et
     opera Helmontii qui inauditam patris medicinam alterius argumenti paradoxis vincere
     velie videtur. Ex Judaeorum cabbalistis et Chemistarum teratologiis multa traxit. His
     accessere Tremulorum vestrorum et Batavorum abnormes sententiae, et Henrici Mori
     vestri et Christiani Knorrii nostri, egregiorum caetera virorum, qui bus diu familiariter
     usus est, meditationes quaedam inexpectatae. Vnde jam novum doctrinae corpus confiavit. Omnia per Messiam creata statuit, velut medium inter Deum et creaturas; animas
     majorum in posterorum corporibus redire mirabiliter et chronologice computat. Adami
     illam primariam animam earn esse ipsam quae sunt quae non abhorrent ab opinionibus acuti cujusdam apud vos viri, qui corporis Christi nescio quibus irradiationibus
     velut balsamo emendari delerique putat sparsum in nobis venenatum et corporale semen
     serpentis. Hi sunt fructus degenerantis libertatis. Vt difficile sit inter persecutionem et
     licentiam tenere modum."
144. G III: 176: "Nous avons eu icy Mons. Helmont durant quelques jours; luy et moy
     nous nous rendimes tous les matins vers les 9 heures dans la chambre de Madame
     l'Electrice; Mons. Helmont tenoit Ie bureau, et moy j'estois l'auditeur, et de temps en
     temps je l'interrogeois, car il a de la peine a s'expliquer clairement. 11 a des opinions
     bien extraordinaires; avec tout cela je trouve qu'il a des tres bons senti mens pour la
     pratique, et qu'il seroit ravi de contribuer au bien general, en quoy il est entierement de
     mon humeur; il a este ami particulier de Mad. la Comtesse de Kennaway, et il me conta
     l'histoire de cette Dame extraordinaire. 11 me parla fort aussi de H. Henry Morus, qui a
     aussi este de ses amis."
145. Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van Helmont," p. 129: "11 n'est pas besoin de
     s'interroger beaucoup sur les faisons de l'acceuil empresse qu'on reserve a van Helmont
     dans toutes les cours: la quete de la pierre philosophale interesse les princes. Et Leibniz,
     conseiller de Sophie, n'y est pas indifferent. C'est ainsi que la magia naturalis se trouve
     au coeur des relations helmontiennes."
146. Becco says that the question of whether of not van Helmont possessed the secret of
     transmutation was not directly dealt with in the correspondence between Leibniz and
     van Helmont (Ibid., p. 129), but this is not the case. See LBr. 389, fols. 74, 82.

147. AK 1,3: 442. Letter to Christian Philipp (2112 November 1680): "II y a peu d'apparence
      que Ie jeune Helmont s~ache de faire la projection: je luy ay parl~ assez familierement il
      y a environ 8 ans, et il a parle assez ingenOment, pour me faire connoistre qu'il n'a rien
      de cette nature."
148. "Binae fere septimanae sunt quod hac [sic] transiit Fransciscus Mercurius Helmontius,
      mihi j am ante viginti quinque propemodum annos notus, cum eo fere quotidie in conclave
      Electricis Brunsivicensis sermones contuli super variis rebus. De adeptorum philosophia
      loquitur modestissime nec magna promittit, et qui ipsi credet mentem potius alio vertet.
      De caetero multas habet praeclaras notitias fuitque mihi consuetudo ejus jucundissima.
      Spem fecit in reditu huc revisendi, quod nobis erit gratissimum, sed aetas ejus gravis
     facit, ut diuturnam sibi possessionem viri polliceri Respublica vix possit, est enim
      octuagenario proximus." (Letter dated 26 March 1696, quoted in Ludwig Stein, Leibniz
      und Spinoza, p. 329) Leibniz adds an interesting comment about the Rosicrucians, which
      indicates that he was willing to consider, if only to reject, all kinds of ideas from all sort
      of sources: "I suspected that the Rosicrucians were a fiction, which Helmont confirmed,
      for to know those things which occur in remote places and to make oneself invisible and
     invulnerable is nonsense or laughable."
149. Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van Helmont," p. 129.
150. Ibid., p. 122.
151. Ibid., p. 121: "Leibniz se montre critique mordant, 10rsque par exemple, il se felicite
     que van Helmont ait rencontr~ en Buchius un homme qui explique ses sentiments de
      maniere intelligible; il "plaisante" volontiers sur les "reveries de feu M. de Helmont."
      La transmigration surtout excite ses sarcasmes; ces "pen sees extraordinaires et peut-etre
      all~goriques" qu'il nous "debite" "pretent ~ rire."
152. Ibid., p. 122.
153. Erikson, Letters to Erik Benzelius the Younger from Learned Foreigners, I: 41.
154. (30 January 1699) GIll: 252-3.
155. Michell Ficant agrees with Becco in thinking that Leibniz made ironic remarks at van
     He1mont's expense, while I see these same remarks as signs of interest and affection.
156. Brown, "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle," p. 93, note 34.
157. Ibid., p. 82.
158. Placcius to Leibniz, II April 1696 (quoted in Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois Mercure van
     Helmont," p. 122): "Ex cabbalisticis Helmontiis et Knorrii ego fateor me parum aut nihil
     proficere potuisse. Non video fundamenta illius rei solida ulla ... " Lebniz to Placcius,
      19 May 1965 (Ibid.): "Ego Franc. Mercurium Helmontium et Korrium Sulsbacensem,
     non a cabbalisticis suis mediationibus, sed aliis multis rectis, ut mihi videtur, sentiis et
     notitiis apud te laudavi. Atque ita factus sum, ut ubique quaeram atque animadvertam
     potissimum, quod laudam, quam quod reprehensionem miretur."
159. Coudert, "The Kabbala Denudata: Converting Jews or Seducing Christians."
160. Grua I: 117 (1 October 1697): P.S ... Ma lettre est bien remplie, de paroles au moins.
     Mais la vostre me donne encor sujet d'adjouter quelque chose. Monsieur van Helmont
     a repass~ chez nous en allant ~ Sulzbach, et j'espere qu'il reviendra bientost. II est
     nullement Misanthrope, au contraire il est tres honneste homme et a des tres bons
     sentimens. Mais il est extraordinaire et on ne Ie gouste pas d'abord. Outre que J'age
     I' affaiblit un peu, car il a je crois 80 ans pass~s. Et cependant, il fait ses voyages dans
     les chariots de poste et sans valet. II ne manque pas d'argent, mais il evite de parler de
     chymie ... "
161. G III: 427: "Je crois que p. 287 on veut parler de feu Mr. van Helmont Ie fils, qui fut
     dans les prisons de l'inquisition ~ Rome, et qui s'avisa dans cette solitude d'examiner
     l'usage des organes dans la pronunciation des lettres, et crut y trouver la formation de
     leur characteres. J'ay connu particulierement Ie meme personnage, et il faut que je luy
     fasse lajustice de dire, qu'il n'estoit pas si ignorant dans la morale qu'il semble qu'on Ie
                                                                                    Notes      167

     represente icy. Ce fut luy qui fit reimprimer Ie Lycurgus d'Ottavio Pisani, qui avait donne
     des avis au public sur la maniere d'abreger les proces. Sa conduite etoit sans reproche,
     ses actions pleines de charite et de desinteressement; et aquelques chimeres pres, qui luy
     etoient restees des impressions de lajeunesse et comme une maladie hereditaire, c'estoit
     un excellent homme dont la conversation etoit tres instructive pour ceux qui en savoient
     profiter. Ses ouvrages ne font voir que ce qu'i! y avoit en luy de moins louable."
162. Aiton, Leibniz, p. 144.
163. Herzog August Bibliothek, Cod-Guelph 30.4, f. 1001Ov.
164. Pierre Behar, for example, has suggested that von Rosenroth influenced Daniel Casper
     von Lohenstein (Silesia Tragica ... Wolfenbiittler Arbeiten zur Barockforschung, Bd. 18.
     Wiesbaden, 1988, pp. 319ft).
165. Leibniz advocated the use of German in: Ermahnung an die Teutschen, ihren Verstand and Sprache besser zu uben, sammt beygefiigten Vorschlag einer Teutsch gesinten
     Gesellschaft and Unvorgreiffliche Gedanken betreffend die Ausubung und Verbesserung
     der Teutschen Sprache.
166. Hypothesis physica nova (1671). This was published anonymously under the initials G.
     G. L. L. Von Rosenroth included it in his translation of Thomas Browne.
167. Des Vortreffiichen Herren Johann Baptista Portae, von Neapolis Magia Naturalis oder
     Haus-Kunst und Wunder-Buch ... Sulzbach, 1680, pp. 207-8.
168. Salecker, Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, p. 4. For his daughter's description, see LBr
     389, ff. 17ff.
169. P. Zesen, Das Hochdeutsche Helikon Rosenthal. Amsterdam, 1669, pp.112-3. Quoted
     in Salecker, Christian Knorr von Rosenroth, p. 6.
170. Quoted in Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van Helmont," p. 131: "Feu M. Knorr,
     qui nous a donne Ie Zohar des Juifs et la Cabbala denudata, et qui etait peut-Nre Ie plus
     habile homme de I'Europe pour la connaissance des choses les plus cachees des juifs, me
     montra une construction du carre magique par memoire, qui revenait a votre methode
     indienne autant que je me souviens. Je chercerai Ie brouillon que j' en fis, car j' ai ete trop
     distrait par d'autres choses pour y penser depuis. Cela me fait croire qu'i! aura appris
     cette methode des Juifs ou des arabes."
171. Ibid.: "Je veux pourtant satisfaire avotre ordre touchant Ie carre magique dont j' ai enfin
     trouve la methode, que feu M. Knorr de Rosenroth me communiqua... Je m'imagine
     qu'i!l'aura trouve dans quelque livre cabalistique."
172. Herzog August Bibliothek, Wolfenbiittel, Cod-Guelf, 30.4, f. 29v: ''Tam remota quidem
     a vobis ora vivere cogor, prohibent ab itinere officium publicam resque oeconomica ... "
173. D. P. Walker, The Ancient Theology: Studies in Christian Platonism from the Fifteenth
     to the Eighteenth Centuries.
174. It has been argued that it is anachronistic and inappropriate to apply the term "antisemitism" before the ninetheenth century (when it was first used) and that the term
     "anti-Judaism" should be employed instead. To my mind such a distinction would be
     valid if the hostility shown towards the Jews before the nineteenth century had been
     purely a matter of religion. However, it was not; and although the concept of race was
     not clearly defined (as it still is not) there were clear racial overtones to medieval and
     early-modem hostility towards the Jews. The literature on this subject is enormous. A
     place to start is with Gavin Langmuir's Towards a Definition ofAntisemitism (Berkeley:
     University of California Press, 1990). Although Langmuir has reservations about using
     the term "antisemitism," he concludes that it is applicable after 1100. For documentation
     of the intense antisemitism of the period see Yardeni, Oberman, Hsia, Manuel, Shachar,
     and Coudert, "The Kabbala Denudata: Converting Jews or Seducing Christians." For a
     different interpretation see Schoeps, Philosemitismus in Barock; Barock Juden, Christen,
     Judenchristen.

175. "Arnica Responsio," KD I, 2: 75--6: " ... in Scriptis Juaeorum Cabbalisticis me inventurum
      sperem, si quid superest Antiquae Philosophiae Barbarico-Judaicae... nihil magis in votis
     habui, quam ut dissipatis omnibus obstantium impedimentorum nubilis Sole ipso atque
     Luce ejusdem c1ariore, frui mihi liceret; quam aspicere posse vix speravi, nisi ipsorum
     vestigiis insistens rivu10rum horum ductu ipsam persequerer scaturiginem; quam in
     antiquioribus illis Libris me inventurum adhuc opinor."
176. Ibid., p. 75: " ... quotiescunque detestandam illam Ecc1esiarum discordiam dolui, cujus
     mala potissimum ab ista dissensionum seminatrice Philosophia nostra Gentili exorta
     esse, facillime demonstrari posset; vi am quoque mediantibus his studiis inveniri posse
     quandoque censui ad concordiam Christianam in distractas reducendam Ecc1esias ... "
177. "Lectori Phiebraeo Salutem!," KD 11,1: 18-19: "Unde cognoscere poteris quanta studio,
     in te ferar, imo cum periculo propriae sanitatis & vitae meae: ut de bonis & sumtibus
     nihil dicam. Nec deterreri me passus sum cum circa initia Magistro meo jam seni, cujus
     nomen ob odium contribulium ejus reticeo, alias sua laude haud privandum, duo morerentur liberi; & mox totidem & mihi, quod ille in poenam publicatae hujus doctrinae
     fieri interpretabatur. Nec deterreor tot non minus domesticorum meorum, quam Amicorum undiquaque omnium monitis; hoc solo fine ut tibi inserviam: ut nimirum rerum
     Hebraicarum cognitio non amplius versetur circa nuda Ritualia; nedum Grammaticalia;
     sed ut ad res ipsas accedatur, earumque cum phrasi & doctrina Novi foederis fiat collatio; si forte hoc etiam medio facilitari queat Judaicae gentis ad fidem Jesu Messiae
     conversio."
178. Schmitt, "The Perennial Philosophy from Agostino Steuco to Leibniz."
179. Daniel Cook, "Leibniz's Uses and Abuse of Judaism and Islam."
180. Foucher de Careil, Leibniz, pp. 57-9: "M. Rosenroth a publie, dit-il, differentes choses
     sans y mettre son nom, comme la Kabbala denudata, pars prima et secunda. La premiere contient un procede pour teindre les etoffes, pris 3 quelques juifs et qui doit etre
     excellent. La deuxieme partie a quelques morceaux du Zoar, Ie Zoar edite en hebreu,
     avec d'anciennes gloses. Guillaume Prostel [sic] a commence une traduction du Zoar
     sur ce qu'on lui en avait envoye 3 Oxford, mais il n'a pas suffisamment compris. II
     etait depourvu des secours que nous avons maintenant. Les juifs editent en ce moment 3
     Sulzbach un nouveau testament syriaque en caractere hebreu. II a ete edite une harmonie
     des Evangiles; la version de Luther est imprimee en caractere allemand. Les Evangiles
     de Mathieu, Marc, Luc et Jean sont designes par les lettres abc d, ce qui se trouve
     dans un seul d'entre eux et marque par une seule lettre, ce qui dans plusieurs est marque
     par plusieurs Iettres. II a de beaux livres orientaux dont l'index se trouve 3 la fin de la
     Kabbala denundata. II a traduit de l'anglais certaines questions sur la preexistence des
     limes; il y a 13 des opinions qu'il n'adopte pas comme les siennes. II a donne ses soins 3
     I' edition allemande des oeuvres de Helmont et ajoute quelques commentaires. Le nouvel
     Helicon est un recueil de chants sacres (Lieder), imprime, je crois 3 Francfort, et qu'on
     trouve 3 Nuremberg, chez Felsekem.
         J'ai parcouru avec lui la Kabbala denudata dontj'ai tire ce qui suit:
         L'Etre infini consiste dans un point indivisible, et la lumiere emanee ou la sphere
     d'activite envoie 3 son gre sa lumiere.
         La premier ne des creatures, Ie Messie, en tant que creature (geschaffen), est appele
     Adam Kadmon; il recoit les premiers rayons de la lumiere et les envoie sur les creatures.
         La deuxieme c1asse est Adam ou Ie corps des limes.
         La troisieme c1asse est celle des intelligences superieures aux limes.
         La quatrieme quae est microprosopon, ou plus brievement, des coleres.
         La cinquieme c1asse est celle des intelligences inferierures qui sont tombees et qu'il
     appelle Adam Belial.
         La demiere c1asse est celle du royaume ou des sephirs dans laquelle les esprits
     ou formes substantielles sont contenus. Saisies du degoOt de la lumiere supreme et
                                                                                  Notes      169

     obscurcies dans leur chute, les six classes renfermees dans Adam Belial en res senti rent
     une certaine souffrance comme les creatures inferieures, et c'est III ce qu'a dit saint Paul
     quand il parle des souffrances des creatures. Cette corruption meme s'est glisse jusque
     dans les classes superieures; mais Ie Messie est descendu et il a mis les classes superieures
     lila place des classes dechues. Des anges tomMs il a fait des ecorces (cortices), c'est-adire des lumieres obscurcies. Ce sont elles qui ont ensuite emmene les limes en captive,
     et c'est ainsi que les limes etaient contenues dans les ecorces dont elles furent tirees peu
     a peu par la generation, ce qui suppose, remarque Leibniz, que Ie choix leur est enleve.
     Les limes sont divisees en lime de la tete, du cou, etc. Le corps contient huit fois la
     mesure de la tete, et ce signe est cabalistique; il signifie Ie huitieme millenaire du monde.
        L'homme, qui est ala fois Ie resume et Ie demier terme de la creation, est un monde en
     raccourci, ou microcosmos [written in Greek]. Quand les ecorces seront epuisees, c'esta-dire quand toutes les limes en auront ete tirees, ce sera l'epoque de la consommation.
     Les limes ont toutes peche dans Adam et Eve, d'ou Ie peche originel. Le Messie a pris
     un corps, il faut donc distinguer trois choses en lui, sa divinite, son rang, Ie premier
     ne des creatures, et enfin ce qui est ne, dans le temps, d'une vierge. II y a differentes
     interpretations sur les personnes divines. Le Fils repond lila classe du Messie, et l'EspritSaint a celIe des limes. Saint Paul parait distinguer entre Dieu et Ie Pere de Notre Seigneur
     Jesus-Christ. II fixe la venue du Messie et son regne sur terre environ a!' annee 1832.
181. AK I, 5: 43: "Je trouve encore un tres habile hommme a Sulzbach, qui est Directeur des
     Conseils, il s'appelle Mr. Knorr de Rosenroth. II passe Ie temps, que sa charge luy laisse,
     a la recherche de la nature par la chymie, et a deterrer les Antiquites cabbalistiques
     des anciens Juifs, ou il a trouve des chose tres excellentes touchant Ie Messie que les
     Juifs modemes ignorent, ou tachent de supprimer ou de detoumer de leur veritable sens.
     Leur Livre capital sur la Cabala s'appelle Zoar, et est tout different du Thalmud, peu
     de Chrestiens l'ont veu, et Ie peuvent entendre. Plusieurs se mocquent encore de telles
     entreprises, mais moy je suis d'un autre sentiment. J'estime par tout ce qu'il y a de
     bons, et suis bien aise de cette difference des genies et des desseins, qui fait que rien
     n'est negliger, et que l'honneur de Dieu et Ie bien des hommes est advance de plusiers
     fa~ons."
182. (April 24?, 1688) AK I, 5: 109: " ... Sulsbaci locutus sum Directori Cancellariae Dn
     Knorrio, viro magnae eruditionis. In poesi Germanica paucos pares habet, sed haec
     minima ejus laudum. Vt de rebus chymicis et mathematicis nihil dicam, vix quisquam
     hodie Christianorum in recondita Hebraeorum doctrina versatior. Multa ex libro Zoar
     excerpta edi curavit, quibus Christianas etiam veritas comprobatur. Apparet enim traditiones veterum Christo testimonium perhibere. Habet quoque complures libros Judaeorum Cabbalisticos ex oriente allatos, in Europa prope invisos, qui commentariorum
     vicem in librum Zoar praestant. Apparet Cabalam Judaeorum esse quoddam Metaphysicae sublimioris genus, quod verborum involucris exutum quaedam praeclara ostendit,
     tametsi alia inspergantur notae vilioris. De Messia sentiunt magnifice, et ultra humanam
     mesuram, neque ut vulgus suae nationis, nudum puer, in quo Christi Historia inde a
     conceptu usque ad disputationem in templo collatis Cabbalistarum locis pulcherrime
     ornatur."
183. (30 April/9 September 1688) AK I, 5: 235: " ... Sulzbaci multum fuit mihi colloquium cum Amplmo. Knorrio directore cancellorum aulicorum; magno et non ignorabis
     Hebraeophilo; et in profundiore illa parte linguae ludaicae quam Kabbalam vocant supra
     plerosque Christianos versato. Is multa insignia manuscripta partim ex oriente nactus est,
     partim aliunde comparavit sibi, unde arcana illius doctrinae eruit, quae fere metaphysica
     est in Kabbala denudata, atque alibi passim specimina dedit. Ostendit mihi jam prope
     confectum opus, cui titulus est: Messias puer, ubi Historia Christi ab annunciatione ad
     baptismum usque, quae ab Evangelistis traditur cum aliunde, tum ex locis veterum cabbalistarum mirifice illustratur. Magno plausu accepit et Aethiopicorum tuorum speratam

      continuationem et quae de Samaritanorum ad Te Epistola, et tuo ilIo instituto conferendi
      varia Alphabeta narrabam. Est et ipse polygottos [written in Greek], itaque optarem inter
      vos commercium intercedere."
184. LBr 389, f. 33: " ... dat ick my in twee deelen niet konden deylen dat ick konden met
      myne genadige 2 Sophia in den garden gaen wandelen daer nu noch wat schoon weder
     is."
185. Ibid., f. 23 (March, 1696): "Monsieur, ... La Lettre que je Vous envoye, Monsieur, est
     de Monsgr. Knorr de Rosenroth, fils de feu Monsgr. Ie Directeur de SuIsbach, qui estoit
      vostre digne ami, et encore Ie mien. Ce jeune Mr. Knorr est gentihomme de Ia Cour de
     Wolfenbutel. Je vois par celie, qu'i1 m'ecrit en meme temps qui'i1 vous croyoit encore
     l'i Hanover, et it me fait scavoir par ordre de Monsgr. Ie Duc Antoine Ulric, que S.A.S.
      souhaiteroit de vous voir et entretenir. Je me souviens de vous avoir dit icy, Monsieur,
     quoyque de moy-meme, que vous feries sans doute un plasir singulier l'i ce Prince, si
     vous passies chez Iuy. Et je voy de n'avoir pas mal devine. Cependant vostre voyage
     de Berlin en aussi bonne companie, qui celie que vous aves eue, ne vous ayant pas
     permis d'aller cette fois l'i Wolfenbutel, j'espere que ce sera une autrefois, Iorsque vous
     repasseres chez nous. Je souhaite, que vous Ie fassies en bonne sante aussi tost que vostre
     commodite Ie permettra, et que nous puissions jouir de vostre conversation des annees
     entieres. Madame I'Electrice de Bronsvic ne scauroit recevoir un plus grand plaisir, puis
     que Ie souvenir meme du peu de temps que vous aves ete icy, lui est agreable. II est vray,
     qu'Elle sera toujours contente de Ie partager avec Madame I'Electrice de Brandenbourg,
     qui n'a pas moins de goust pour les choses et pour Ies personnes excellents.
          Au reste je me rapport l'i nous discours, et je serai bien aise d'apprendre, que vous
     ayes pris la resolution de communiquer bientost au monde quelques unes de vos belles
     et importantes pensees. Et je suis avec zele,
          Vostre humble et tres-obeisant Serviteur,
          Leibniz."
186. Ibid., f. 27 (20 March 1696): "Monsieur,
          Je prens Ia Iiberte de vous recommender l'inc1use pour Mr. Helmont, ne scachant
     comment Ia Iuy faire tenir autrement, car je ne doute pas que vous ne connoissiez pas un
     homme, dont Ie nom et les vertus sont si connus dans Ie monde. II se trouve presentement
     l'i Hanover, et S. A. Sme. Ie Duc mon Maitre est curieux de connoitre un homme, dont Ia
     renomme Iuy a dit tant de bien. Si vous Ie pourrer persuader de venir icy, vous obligerer
     S. A. sensiblement. Pour moy je ne vous serois pas moins oblige, car, comme iI a toujours
     honore feu Mr. mon pere de son affection, et qui'i1s etoient les plus intimes amys, et
     que j'ay I'honneur de Ie connoitre depuis longtems, je souhaiterois bien de pouvoir me
     recommender dans les bonnes graces. Au reste je suis, Monsieur,
          Vostre tres humble et obeissant serviteur
          H. Knorr de Rosenroth."
187. Ibid., f. 34: (Berlin, 7 April 1696): "lck en kan V. D. L noch het Hanover se gezelschap
     niet vergeten. zulk zoo het my moyelyck zal zyn, dat myne gezondtheyt ende affaires
     toc1aten, is myne intentie, myne rugreyze van zolzbach naer Hanover te nemen, ende zoo
     ick onze Iieve hizige Courvurstien oock aldaer zal vinden, zal de harmoni perfeckt zyn.
     Hope dan naer het schryven van de Heere Leibniz, ende de heere Knor de Rosenroot,
     hare Durchlucht, den hertogh Antoine Ulrich, de handen te gaen kussen. Ick verblyve,
     die ick atryt geweest ben, met V. D. L den zegen des Heeren te wensen. H."
188. Ibid., f. 33 (Ter Borg, October, 1696): "Durchleuchtigste Courvurstin
         Tsedert myne Afreyze van Hanover om naer Amsterdam hare D L de Courvurstin
     van Brandenbourg te gaen vinden, zoo heb ick haer te Bilevelt aengetroffen alwaer ick
     haer met droefheyt verlaten heb: zonderling om dat zy my te rugh wilden voeren naer
     Hanover. De refugie was my heel sensibel zonderling ziende dat ick my in twee deelen
                                                                                 Notes      171

     niet konden deylen dat ick konden met myne genadige 2 Sophia in den garden gaen
     wandelen daer nu noch wat schoon weder is
        Hier zynde aenkomen heb ick my by V D L met myne Baze menigh mael gewenst om
     haer met verstandighe persoonen oft predicanten te hooren spreken weghen de dispute
     der religie.
        Zy heeft den Bybel met vlys gelezen is goedtaerdigh en goetdoende vry van onverstandighe imbeeldinghe zoo kan zy met discretie den Mensen doen bekennen dat de
     schristure die de mensen gegeven is moet zyn nae ider zyne qualiteyt ordentelyck en
     verstandich nae deze muzike brengt zy aile deelen der dispute in verstandt en liefde
     ten eynde deze myne baze heef my verteelt onder andere deze naervolghende zaken die
     zy op myn verzoeck int frans geschreven heeft oordeelende dat het konden dienen om
     affgeschreven te worden om naer vranckreyt te Zynden aen Madame als oock den droom
     van de Dochter van de heere van Rosenroodt die de Hoogduytse Rymen uyt den Latyne
     van Boetius overgezet heeft Ick vermeyne alhier noch ettelycke daghen te verblyven om
     myne schriften affeschryven ende te adiusteren eer ick naer Amsterdam denck te reyzen.
     soo ick hier oft daer V. D. L eenighen dienst kan doen konnen de brieven geaddresseert
     vorden aen my ten huyze van Madame La Barone de Merode dict Mutzfelt..."
189. Ibid., f. 99 (10/20 October 1698). See also Leibniz's letter to van Helmont (29 December
     1697) in which he thanks him for carrying out certain political negotiations (Ibid., f 97).
190. Coudert, The Impact of the Kabbalah in the Seventeenth Century: The Life and Thought
     of Francis Mercury van Helmont, ch. 2.
191. LBr 389, f. 73 "(La Haye ce ler de Dec. 1696): M'ayant trouve demierement, Madame,
     dans une compagnie tt Bruxelles, ou estoit la Princesse de Chimay, de la famille de
     Bossu, je ne scay comme l'on vint tt parler du Sr. de Helmont. Elle me prit tt part, et se
     mit tt me faire je ne scay si c'estoit un Eioge, ou une critique de la vie de cet homme Itt.
     La conclusion est, q'elle me dit Ie connoistre particulierement pour un homme, qui a des
     secrets merveilleux en matiere de Medecine, et d'autres choses; mais que cela Ie rend
     errant, me tesmoignant que c'est par crainte qu'on attrape les Secrets. II en a un, [tt ce
     que la Princesse me ditl auquel il donne des differens noms, mais lequel aussi tous ceux,
     qui en ont veu les experiences miraculeuses, baptisent pour Ie Mercure Diaphoretique,
     qui est une poudre de couleur de chair.
         Pour moy, Madame, je suis l'homme du monde peut-estre qui croit Ie moins tt ces
     sortes de Secrets. D' Ailleurs il se peut aisement que je n'escrive rien tt Y.A.S.E qu'Elie
     me sliche sans cela. Mais la Princesse de Chimay m'a prie si instamment d'en escrire tt
     V.A.E; de l'asseurer que cette poudre est un tresor qui n'a point de prix, et dont elle a
     veu des effets prodigieux; et de la supplier de ne pas perdre I'occasion d'avoir du Sr. de
     Helmont Ie Secret, ou au moins la Poudre, que je ne puis refuser tt cette bonne Dame de
     me donner cette Liberte et d'asseurer par cette occasion Y.A.E que je suis
         A Steffani Abbe de Lessing."
192. Ibid., f. 74 (4114 Decembr. 1696): "Vous voyes, Monsieur, par ce que je viens de vous
     rapporter de la Lettre, que Mad. l'Electrice a recue de Bruxelles, que Mad. la Princesse
     de Chi may estime infiniment vostre Secret. Mad. l'Eletrice m'a ordonne de vous ecrire
     ce qui s'en dit, et vous nous en dires ce que vous jugeres tt propos; et ce que vous
     voudres que nous disions. II n'est pas toujours necessaire de desabuser les gens. Au
     contraire la bonne opinion qu'ils ont des remedes en augmente l'effect. Outre que je
     crois aisement, que vous aves des choses singulieres, et qui meritent d'estre estimees,
     tant sur la Medecine que sur d'autres sujets. Mad. la Princesse de Chi may souhaiteroit,
     qu' on put avoir au mois quelque chose de la poudre au defaut du Secret. Elle ne demande
     pas tant ces choses pour elle meme, qu'elle nous conseille nous memes de ne pas perdre
     l'occasion d'obtenir des Secrets ou remedes de cette importance. J'estime la curiosite
     de cette Dame, et je prefere les gens de ce caractere tt ceux, qui ont en meme temps de
     I'ignorance et du mepris pour ce qu'ils ne scavent point."

 193. Ibid., f. 78 (Ter Borg, 14 December 1696): "Ick heb Vwc CVDL genadigh schryven
       van Linsbourg van den 16/26 October gepassert wei ontfanghen Ick ende myne
       nichte van Merode b1yven ons a1tyt verbonden aen VDL voor de genadighe erinneringhe ende toestemminghe desselvighe by HCVDL van Brandenbourg myne genadighe
       Courvurstin. Den droom van de Maeght van myne nichte is een droomende discours
       geweest dan de Mascherade van een zoentien is verandert worden in een dochtertien die
       de dobbel aengename Namen is Sophie van myne genadighe Courvurstinnen gegheven
       zyn worden. De anders zonder interest zynde ende ick sensa turbar m'acosto. zoo om
       de presentie der vrinden die by den doop waren heb ick in VCVDL name haer gauden
       beeltenis vereert. Eer ick dezen ten eynde conden brenghen ter oorzake van eenen kramp
       in de handt die my noch by blyft dat ick alle regulen moet ophounden die zyn begin
       genomen heeft zynde eenen tydt slape100s geweest daer eene Colycke op gevolgt is
       met eene swackheyt zoo dat ick een Winter per geworden ben als ick in myne Nichten
       brief van den eersten dezen an VCVDL geschreven heb Ick dancke den heere van myne
       toeneminghe in crachten [ende added in copy] hope weder tot eene zomer per te worden
       om Vwe CVDL ende den genadighen Courvurst noch eens optewachten. Wat aenbelangt
       he schryven dat de Heer Lybnitz my gedaen heeft weghen het schryven van de Prinsesin
       van Simay aen VCVDL rakende eene medsyn die ick zoude zeynden. Den Persoon waer
       voer het is heb ick bereyts een vemoeghen gedaen door zyn excellens den heer Diest
       affgezante te Brusselen van hare durchlucht dem Courvurst van Brandenbourgh die my
       een iaer gel aden te kleef zynde badt dat ick den Prins de Voudemont die Medesyne
       zoude deelachtig maken tghen ick als gheen doctor zynde en konden doen. Maer nu
       heeft hy door myne Nichte van Merode zoo veel te weghen gebracht dat ick die aen
       eenen verstandighe Doctor die zy by my zullen zeynde zoude willen openbaren tghene
       ick hem toegezegt heb.
          Zoo VCVDL beyde myne Nicht van Merode ende mynen blinden girighen swagher
       eenen diens geliefden te doen van haer beyde te helpen door my oft haer een handtbriefken gena digst te schryven getuyghende dat myn swaher by haer gezocht heeft dat
       zy by my mocht maken dat ick hem alle myne goederen zoude schencken den tydt zoude
       men ongever mocten me1den het en komp op een iaer nict aen. Ick heb myn swagher te
       weten gedaen door het schryven daer de Copy hier neven gaedt als VDL kan zien dat
       VDL my zulx zeyden als in den brief staet als dien die hem dat schryven behandighden
      is hy zeer gram geworden ende eer hy bedaerde zeyde dat hy wilden swart maken by alle
      hoven daer ick verkeerden dat handt briefken zounden myne nicht haer bedinen konnen
      in recht zegt haren advocaet dan het leengoedt dat ick myne nichte gegeven heb daer
      over mynen zwagher prosedeert is het Voomaemste punck van reche daer hy hem op
      bewept dat hy ende myne zuster het zelvigh der tich iaren in rust ende vrede als haer
      eyghen goedt bezeten habben dat niet waer is als den medegaende brieff bewyst. deven
      myn schryven en gelt niet tot getuygenis maer een anders getuygenis gelt in de rechten
          zoo het nu gviel dat door VDL getruygenis bewezen wert dat hy die goederen niet in
      Vrede genoten heeft ende dat hy daerop het prozes quaem te verliezen zullen zy bey de
      geholpen zyn alsdan zal ick hem alle myne goederen schenken als ick hem bedenkter
      wyze in dit schryven te kennen gheef dat den blinden giriger niet en kan zien
          Maer zoo myne nichte het prozes verliest zoo zal ick myne goederen hem niet geven
      maer andere als den brief melt
          Aen den heer Lybnitz hope ick met den naesten post aBe zyne brieven te beantwoorden
      da tegenwoordlich my het schryven zeer swaer is. Hier nevens gaet het schryven van
      Rotterdam tot nieus ick bidde my doer imanden te Laten weten oft dezen ter handt is
      gekomen."
194. "Mad. I'Electrice avoit coustume de dire en parlant de luy, qu'il ne s'entendoit pas
      luy-mesme" (this comes from a resume of van Helmont's views written by Leibniz in
      September 1696. Klopp, Correspondenz mit Sophie, II, p. 8).
                                                                                 Notes      173

195. Pertz, ed., "Tagebuch," in Geschichtliche Aufsatze und Gedichte Gottfried Wi/hem Leibniz Gesammeltewerk, pp. 184ff.: "3. August. Der ChurfUrstin Durchl. haben mir einen
     Brief von Madame la Duchesse d' Orleans zu lesen geben, darinn sie occassione Hm. Helmonts Uber die Seele raisonnirt, und vermeinet, wir hlltten deren Unsterbligkeit nur aus
     dem Glauben, dem natUrlichen Verstande nach wUrde es scheinen, es gehe alles wieder
     in die Elementen, umb neue Gebuhrten zu machen. So konnen man auch nicht wohl
     etwas von Gottes Thun aus den Regeln der Gerechtigkeit urtheilen, weil solche Regeln
     vor die Menschen; daran das hOchsten Wesen nicht gebunden. Soll meine Gedancken
     daruber geben. Die Gelegenheit von diesen Brief komt von Hm. Helmonts Speculationem, welche die ChurfUrstin an Madame iiberschrieben, so damit nicht einig, doch
     seine Zufriedenheit lobet und wUndschet...
  4. August. Habe kurze Gedancken Uber den Brief von Madame vor die ChurfUrstin aufgesetzet... (p. 184). [These thoughts appear in a letter to the Electress published by Grna I;
     378.]
  6. August. Vor die ChurfUrstin punctiret in ihrem Cabinet zu Herrenhausen, was Sie an
     Madame antworten kondte, die Seelen betr.; als von Hm. Helmont. Habe Abschrifft
     behalten... (p. 188)."
196. See van der Wall's articles on Serrarius in the bibliography.
197. "Coelius Secundus Curio wrote a little book, De Amplitudine Regni Coelestis, which was
     reprinted not long since; but he is indeed far from having apprehended the compass of the
     kingdom of heaven" (Theodicy, p. 134). Curio (or Curione) had edited Mario Nizolio's
     Observationes omnia M. T. Ciceronis verba ... Basle, 1548. Curio was listed in the
     Catholic Index as "auctores primae c1assis," meaning that all his works were forbidden,
     although dictionaries and books on non-controversial subjects might be allowed after
     censored" (J. Tedeschi, The Prosecution of Heresy, p. 322).
198. LBr 389, f. 9ff. (3 September 1694): "J'ay 10 avec plaisir et profit les deux livres que M.
      Van Helmont a enyoyes a V.A.E. II n'aurait pO mieux adresser les pensees sublimes qui
     s'y trouvent. Je voudrois qu'il y eut joint Ie troisieme intitule Aanmerkingen over den
     Mensch cite dans Ie livre de M. Buchius sur la divinite. J'y trouve bien des choses qui
      me reviennent assez; mais il y en a aussi ouje n'entre point, faute d'en voir des preuves
      suffisantes. Plusieurs ne remarquent dans les Iivres que ce qu'i1s croyent y pouvoir
     reprendre, et moy tout au contraire, je me donne toute mon attention a ce qui me parait
     Ie plus solide.
         Je suis bien aise que M. van Helmont a trouve en Mr. Buchius un homme qui explique
     ses senti mens d'une maniere intelligible. J'ai souvent souhaite que feu Mr. Knorr 11
     Sulzbach qui estait si habile homme, eut voulu ou pO en prendre la peine, comme iI
     avoit commence de faire dans son livre sur la Science Cabalistique des Juifs. Mais je
     souhaiterois encor d'avantage que quelqu'un conservat a la posterite quantite de belles
     decouverts que Mons. van Helmont doit avoir faites sur plusiers arts et sciences en
     particulier.
         Quant aux deux livres, je voy que I'un ne porte point Ie nom de son auteur. C'est
     pourquoy je doute si M. van Helmont voudra I'avouer. II est vray que l'etemite des
     peines qu'on y contredit, n'est pas conforme 11 I'ancienne Theologie des Pagens, et n'est
     pas assez recue chez les juifs. Et mi!me parmy les Chretiens. Le grand Origen ne I'a
     point crne. II semble que S. Gregoire de Nysse 11 penche du coste des Platoniciens, qui
     ont crO que tous les Chasti mens du Dieu ne sont que des Medecines, et n'ont pour but
     que l'amendement. S. Jerome et quelques autres peres n'ont pas este eloignes de croire
     tous les Chrestiens seroient en fin sauve apres avoir passee par Ie feu; ainsi I' enfer leur
     deveroit un purgatoire. Dans Ie Siecle passe un scavent homme Celsius Secundus Curio
     fait un livre de la grandeur du Royaume Celeste, ou iI pretend prouver que Ie nombre
     des sauves est incomparablement plus grand que celuy des damnes, non obstant ce qui
     se dit du chemin estroit. De nostre temps Pierre Serrarius qui estoit a Amsterdam, a deja

       voulu annoncer aux hommes cet Evangile nouveau pretendu, ou cette bonne nouvelle
       de l'Extinction de l'enfer. On dit que S. Louis (sije ne me trompe) recontra une fille qui
       portait d'une main un flambeau allume, et une cruche pleine d'eau de l'autre: Le roy luy
       demanda ce cela vouloit dire. Elle respondit que c'estoit, pour bruler Ie paradis et pour
       eteindre l'enfer, a fin que les hommes servissent Dieu dorenavent, sans crainte servile
       et sans esperance mercenaire. Passe pour la crainte de I'enfer, mais pour les paradis,
       c'est autre chose. Ca puisqu'il consistera dans la vision de Dieu, comment peut on aimer
       Dieu de tout son coeur sans souhaiter de Ie voir Ie plus qu'il est possible. On dit que les
       Suisses deliberant, s'il falloit garder Ie purgetoire quelcun de la compagnie se levant leur
       proposa, puisque ils y estoient, de casser encor les diables avec tout l'enfer. Mais pour
       parler serieusement, mon sentiment est, que les peines ne scauroient estre eternelles qu'
       a cause de I'eternite des peches. Ceux qui pecheront tousjours seront tousjours punis
       avec justice.
          Mais je passe a l'autre livre dont Ie sujet est plus etendu, puisqu'il contienne les
       principes de la Theologie de M. van Helmont, mis en ordre par M. Buchius. 1'ay este
       ravi de voir qu'on reprend dans la preface, ceux qui separent la Theologie d'avec la
       philosophie. Celajustifie assez Mons. van Helmont contre ceux qu I'accusent de donner
       dans l'enthousiasme. Car les Enthousiastes ont cela de commun avec les Libertins, qu'ils
       disent des injures a la raison.
          Je suis encor de sentiment de M. van Helmont lors qu'il reprend les Gassendistes et
       les Cartesiens qui s'attachent uniquement a la philosophie corpusculaire, qui explique
       toutes les choses de la nature par la matiere ou par l' etendue. Et j' ay fait voir moy meme
       qu'il y faut encor faire entrer Ie principle de la force dans Ie quel consiste pour ainsi dire
       la connexion des choses spirituelles et corporelles. Car je tiens que les lois de la nature et
      les principes de la physique ne scauroient estre expliques qu'en employant les principes
       metaphysiques dont on a besoin pour bien entendre ce que c'est que la force.
          Je demeure encor d'accord que toutes les substances durent tousjours et ne scauroient
      perir. Ce que je tiens veritable non seulement a l'egard des ames humaines mais encor
      a l' egard de celles des autres animaux. l' ay fort dispute la dessus par lettres avec Ie
      celebre M. Arnaud. Ce n'est pas que je croye la transmigration des ames; mais je crois
      la transformation d'un meme animal, qui devient tanstost grand tantost petit, et prend
      di verses formes, comme nous voyons faire les vers it soye, quand ils deviennent papillons.
      Cela est plus conforme a I'ordre, que la transmigration, il y a donc de l'apparence qu'il
      n'y a ny generation ny mort a la rigeur, mais que l'animal ne fait qu'estre enveloppe
      et developpe, l'ame demeurant tousjours unie a un corps organique, quoyque ce corps
      puisse devenir incomparablement plus subtil, que les objects de nos sens. C'est ce qui a
      deja dit I'ancien auteur d'un livre attribue a Hippocrate. Et meme I'auteur de l'Epistre
      aux Hebreux dit que les choses apparentes sont produites des non apparentes. Cependent
      je ne veux point etendre cette doctrine a l'homme, ny a I'ame humaine, estant persuade
      qu'ayant en elle l'image de Dieu, elle est gouvernee par des loix toutes particulieres,
      dont on ne scauroit apprendre Ie detail que par la revelation. Et comme il semble que
      la Ste Ecriture n'a point voulu s'expliquer la dessus, autant que nous Ie desirerions, je
      doute que nous puissions esperer dans cette vie un aussi grand detail de l' estat de l' autre
      vie, que M. van Helmont nous semble donner.
          Je suis fort de son sentiment lors qu'il refute ceux qui croyent que nostre arne se perd
      dans I' esprit universe!. II semble que c' est I' opinion de quelques Mystiques et Quietistes.
      Mais c'est une chimere qui n'a point de sens; outre qu'elle est contraire a l'immortalite.
          Lors qu'il compose tout de feu et d'eau et les prend pour des principes spirituels, je
      crois qu'illes entend allegoriquement, et qu'il a voulu signifier par la Ie principe actif et
      Ie principe passif.
          1'approve sur tout son sentiment de I'infinite des choses, etj'ay deja dit dans Ie journal des scavants que chaque partie ayant des parties, a l'infini, il n'y a point de petite
                                                                                 Notes      175
     portion de la matiere qui ne contienne une infinite actuelle de creatures et apparemment
     de creatures vivants. C'est par I~ que la nature porte par tout Ie caractere de son Createur. Et iI est assez raisonnable de croire que chacune de ces creatures, quelque petite
     qu'elle soit, aura son temps pour parvenir a une plus grand perfection. II parle encor
     de I' enveloppement de toutes choses dans Ie premier homme; de la propre humanite
     individuelle d' Adam unie au Messie; aussi bien que nostre dependance encor presente
     d' Adam; et de sa formation du sang de la terre, ou de la vie terrestre. Item, qu' Adam
     et Eve, ont este chacun homme et femme, et par consequent quatre en tout, et que c'est
     pour cela que la Messie est venu au bout de quatre mille ans dans la plenitude des temps.
     Et comment les hommes seront tous reunis dans Adam lors qu'a la consummation du
     siecle chacun sera venu ~ sa perfection et aura spiritualite et perfectionne encor avec
     luy les creatures corporelles qui luy sont atacMes; et enfin des revolutions des mondes
     suivants: Quant ~ tout cela et de quantite d'autres pensees extraordinaries et peut estre
     allegoriques que M. van Helmont nous debite, je me dispenseray d'y entrer. Je crois
     qu'une partie de ces dogmes sont incontestables. Mais avant que d'en juger, iI faudra
     attendre de luy des plus grands eclaircissements. En I'assurant de nostre docilite en tout
     ce qui n'est point contraire ~ la raison ny ~ I'ecriture, ny ~ la tradition perpetuelle de
     I'Eglise Catholique. Je me contente de scauvoir en general, qu'~ cause de la Sagesse et
     de la bonte immense de I'auteur des choses, tout est si bien ordonne, et ira si bien, meme
     apres cette vie, pour ceux qui aiment Dieu. Apprendre d'avantage, nous en serons ravis.
     Et je ne doute point qu'iI ne juge V.A.E aussi digne que quique ce soit dans I'univers,
     d'estre instruite dans ces misteres. Je suis avec devotio ... "
199. Pertz, ed. Tagebuch: "7. August. Habe diesen Abend mit Herrn von Helmont viel
     geredet, wegen Erd ausbringen: ob Schiebekarrn guth. Durch motum hominis mit den
     Karrn viel tempus und vergebene Miihe. Praestat, hominem movere sine motu tanto sui.
     Von Gold schlagen. Von Braten und JCochen mit eisem Kasten. Zu redressiren, so krumb
     gewachsen, darinn er in Tractatu de Microcosmo et Macrocosmo, so teutsch nicht vOIlig
     sub tit. Paradoxa iibersetzt. Von Drucken mit dem Fuss: mit beiden Handen spinnen.
     Hechel (p. 189)...
          8. August... Den Hem. Helmont meine Gedancken gesagt vom geschwinden fortkommen auff Schuhfedem. Von Voiture auf allezeit glatten Boden. Er meinet... [symbol for
     mercury and for copper] sey gemacht (p. 190)...
          9 August... Hr. Helmont is Nachmittag bey mir gewesen; haben viel von seinen
     Speculationibus geredet. Darunter ein und ander Guthes. Ich habe ihm gegen sein Seder
     olam remonstriret, daB die chronologia sacra aus der Massen ungewiss, weil die LXX
     Dolmetscher und der Codex Samaritanus vom heutigen Hebrliischen Text umb viellOO
     Jahr abweichen. Er meinet zu dessen Justification ein MaaB zu finden in des Cain 7 mahl
     und Lamechs 77 mahl, da das Jahr der Siindftuth soli heraus kommen (p. 191)."
200. Foucher de Careil published two of these, but several more versions exist in various
     stages of composition, which attest to Leibniz's interest in van Helmont's ideas. See AK
     I,ll: 17-23.
201. Foucher de Careil, "Remarques inedits de Leibniz sur Ie Seder Olam," Leibniz, p. 47:
     " ... j'ai appris que Ie livre n'a pas ete compose par Franz Mercurius Van Helmont, mais
     par un medecin de ses amis. J'ay lu ce livre iI y a deja du temps, etj'y trouve quelques
     bonnes pensees, mais melees de quanitite d'imaginations qui ne sont appuyees sur aucun
     fondement de la raison ni de la sainte Ecriture; car les opinions et les expressions de
     ces anciens cabalistes hebreux ne sauraient servir de preuve assez solide, quoyqu'il y ait
     quelques-uns qui s'imaginent que ce sont des traditions de MOise et des anciens sages,
     parce qu'en effect cabale signifie tradition"[This is from the first critique).
202. Ibid.: "L'auteur commence par une maniere de parler qui a quelque chose de choquant,
     car iI dit que Dieu est un agent necessaire. Ceperidant, je con viens avec la censure qu' on
     luy peut donner un bon sens, et c'est ce que la charite ordonne: car, dans Ie fond, Dieu

      est toujours determine a faire Ie meilleur et Ie plus parfait, et cela n' est pas contraire a la
      liberte, car la veritable liberte consiste dans Ie plus parfait usage des facultes."
203. Ibid., pp. 49-54: "Le sentiment des anciens cabalistes paron avoir ete que Ie Messie,
      encore suivant son humanite ou en tant que creature, a ete toujours 1'ami des creatures,
      c'est ce que feu M. Knorr Rosenroth a montre dans sa Cabbala denudata, et 1'auteur
      suit quelquefois les memes principes; ce sont des pensees assez belles, mais il n'y en a
     point de preuves assurees.
         L'auteur parle assez etrangement lorsqu'il dit, page 28, que tous les esprits crees sont
      corporeals; il auroit dit avec plus de justesse que tous les esprits crees sont incorpores.
     C'estoit aussi Ie sentiment des anciens philosophes platoniciens, et la pluspart des Peres
     de l'Eglise ont crn que les anges memes avoient des corps subtils. Suivant cetteopinion,
     les limes ne seroient jamais separees de tout corps, mais seulement de ce corps grossier.
      Si c'est 1'opinion de 1'auteur, elle n'a rien qui soit condamnable.
         Il paroit aussi assez probable qu'il n'y a point de substance corporelle dans la nature
     qui ne soit douee de quelque vie, lime ou perception, ou du moins de quelque entelechie
     ou force d'agir, qui est Ie plus bas degre des formes, et s'il n'a pas toute la nature de
     l'lime, il a du moins quelque chose analogique qui repond a la perception et a 1'appetit.
         Si 1'auteur s'estoit contente de ces generalites bien entendues, on pourroit etre content
     de lui, mais il passe a des particularites qu'on ne sauroit connoitre ni par la raison, ni
     par la revelation. Cependant il se donne carriere la-dessus et se fait des idees assez
     plaisantes: il met un monde de creation duquel est venu Ie monde de formation qui
     est double, superieur pour les limes qui sont demeurees dans la purete de la creation,
     dont Ie siege est Ie paradis, et inferieur pour celles qui sont dechues par Ie peche et qui
     demeurent hors du paradis dans des endroits nuisibles. Entin, de ce monde inferieur de
     formation est venu notre monde qu'il appelle Ie monde de faction, OU il Ya une stupidite
     et comme une espece de mort qui prevaut sur les limes, en sorte qu'elles y agissent
     mechaniquement plutOt que par un principle vital. Ce qui ne se doit pourtant entendre
     que comparativement, car il y a de la vie et de la corporeite partout, il veut que ce monde
     visible n'est pas cree, mais fait des actes preexistants, et que les limes de ce monde ne
     sont point crees, non plus que nostre corps avec sa vie qui s'appelle nephesh, appartient
     proprement au monde de la faction, et que nostre esprit, que les Hebreux appellent ruah,
     qui est mitoyen entre Ie corps et 1'lime, nous est restee seule du monde de la creation.
     Entin, que Ie plus grossier est Ie vehicule de I' autre, Ie nephesh du ruah et Ie ruah du
     neshama, et que vice versa, Ie plus subtil penetre 1'autre et illumine par ses rayons.
         Ces pensees ne sont pas tout a fait exactes dans la rigueur de la vraye philosophie, car
     dans la verite il n'y a qu'un monde que Dieu cree encore continuellement, et ce monde est
     ani me partout et etendu partout. Mais on y peut considerer deux regnes, celui des esprits
     que Dieu gouveme en prince, comme une personne gouveme d' autres personnes, et celui
     des corps qu'il gouveme en architecte ou machiniste, comme un habile maitre gouveme
     ses machines. Ces regnes se penetrent et s'entre-repondent profondement, sans que 1'un
     trouble les loix de 1'autre, en executant tous deux ce qui est dans Ie monde ideal du divin
     verbe. Il est vray cependant qu'il y a de la difference entre les esprits ou intelligences et
     entre les limes et qu'on y peutjoindre peut-etre des limes ou entlechies inferieures aux
     limes. Mais tout cela ne compose qu'un monde qui se continue et qui comprend tous ces
     differents etre doues de corps organises suivant leur portee. Si toutes ces entelechies sont
     dans un genre, comme pretend nostre auteur, en sorte que la plus basse puisse arriver
     a 1'estat des plus nobles, c'est ce qui n'est point decide. La difference entre les corps
     visibles et invisibles n'est que selon nous, et ne change point Ie genre; ainsi, si Ie ruah
     n'est autre chose qu'un corps subtil, on ne Ie doit point distinguer des autres corps, que
     comme la petite poussiere qui voltige dans les rayons de soleil se distingue des cailloux.
         Quoy qu'il en soit, l'auteur, suivant les cabalistes, appelle Ie monde des creations
     briah, celui de formation jezhirah, et celui de faction asiah, mots qui se trouvent tous
                                                                                    Notes      177

     trois dans !sale, chap. xliii; il monte meme encore plus haut et con~oit un monde que
     les Hebreux appellent azi/ath, qui signifie: ce qui est Ie plus prochain de Dieu ou
     de I'Estre meilleur et supreme; mais ce monde n'appartient qu'lt l'Estre moyen entre
     Dieu et les creatures, qui est Ie Messie, et l'auteur dit plus bas (question 24, sur l'
     Apocalypse) que, outre psyche ou nephesch tire du monde asiatique, ruah dujeziratique
     et nishmar [ neshama] du briatique, il y a une quatrieme vie nommee chaja, qui vient
     du monde azilutique, et qui par consequent doit estre l'inhabitation intermediaire de
     l'esprit de Jesus-Christ. Ainsi, Ie monde azilutique est du Messie, Ie briatique des
     limes, lejeziratique des anges non consommes, et l'asiatique des hommes revestus de
     corps visibles. II est vray que les Hebreux comptent encore douze emanations dans
     Ie monde azilutique, mais leur difference n'est que modale. Ce monde dure'toujours,
     mais il y a une infinite de briatiques ou mondes que Dieu cree de temps en temps
     dont naissent continuellement de nouveaux mondes jeziratiques et aziratiques. C'est
     pourquoy Salomon a dit "qu'on ne sauroit trouver Ie principe des oeuvres de Dieu."
     Si par Ie monde azilutique l'auteur entend Ie monde intelligible qui est dans la pensee
     de Dieu, on Ie peut admettre, mais alors il ne faut point dire qu'il tient Ie milieu entre
     Dieu et les creatures, puisqu' il appartient It Dieu mesme. Quant aux autres mondes, j' ai
     dejlt dit ce qu'on en doitjuger. On pourroit meme distinguer encore deux spheres ou si
     vous voulez deux mondes intelligibles en Dieu, scavoir celuy des idees simples qui est
     Ie monde de l'entendement divin et celuy des decrets, c'est-It-dire des idees resolues ou
     projetees qui est Ie monde de la volonte divine. Et ce monde execute est l'univers des
     natures, compose de deux regnes qui sont: celuy des esprits dont les loix sont morales,
     et tendant au meilleur, et celuy des corps dont les loix sont mathematiques et tendent
     au plus grand, et cette combinaison fait tellement la perfection des choses, que ce qui
     s'execute est toujours Ie plus grand bien possible.
        L' auteur ne doit pas nier la creation presente de limes, sous pretexte que rien ne se
     cree icy; c'est tout Ie contraire, et il faut plustOt dire que tout se cree continuellement,
     et que sa conservation est une creation continuee. Ainsy, il est inutile de disputer de la
     preexistence des limes, car soit qu'elles ayant deja este ou non, il est toujours vray que
     Dieu les cree presentement. De dire que les limes descendent d'un monde superieur dans
     un monde inferieur, ce sont des expressions metaphysiques, et tout ce qu'il y a de vray,
     est qu'une lime peut changer d'estat et monter ou descendre en perfection, sans qu'on en
     puisse determiner Ie detail, puisque la revelation ne nous I' explique point, car, sui vant la
     raison, si des differents degres des creatures forment differents mondes, il n'y auroit rien
     qui nous obligeroit It nous bomer aux trois mondes de l' auteur. Et si, au-dessus du monde
     jeziratique il y a un asiatique, pourquoy n'y auroit-il pas encor un autre au-dessous de
     celuy-ci et cela It l'infini? Ainsi, il est plus raisonnable de reconnoistre une infinite de
     degres dans les perfections des creatures du mesme monde, que d'en faire des differents
     mondes: ce qui ne sert qu' It estonner les gens par la nouveaute de l' expression. Si I' auteur
     veut appeler differents mondes les differents regnes qui se penetrent, il n'en trouvera
     que deux veri tables dans les creatures, Ie regne moral des esprits et Ie regne mecanique
     des corps grossiers, mais ils n'en penetrent que les corps, au lieu que les corps subtils ou
     grossiers sont egalement penetres par les limes et entelechies qui leur sont intimement
     presentes."
204. Pertz, ed., Tagebuch:
        "10 August... Mit M. Helmont speculiret. Seine ErcUirungen der Heil. Schrifft sind
     offt wunderlich; unterdessen stecken einige guthe Gedancken darunter, damit ich einig.
     Wir haben fast den ganzen Nachmittag davon geredet. Wegen metempsychosis kan ich
     von ihm keinen zuliinglichen BeweiB Mhren (p. 193)...
  12 August... Habe mit Hm. Helmonts Gedancken diesen Morgen zu thun gehabt, umb ihm
     meine Meinung deswegen mitzutheilen (p. 194)...

  16 August. .. Mit M. Helmont etliche Stunden geredet von seinen Gedancken, dabey ich nicht
     wenig Guthes find, womit ich einig; viel aber mir zweyfelhafft vorkomt; und sonderlich
     enige wunderliche Interpretationes der heil. Schrifft mir nicht anstehen. Seine intentiones
     und Gemiith finde sehr guth und ItIblich; auch ist seine Gelassenheit hoch zu schatzen
     (p. 198)...
  28 August. Nachmittag meist mit Hem. Helmont zubracht (p. 207).
        Diese Woche bin mit vielen Geschafften, Visiten, Briefschreiben und Frembden distrahirt gewesen, daB ich das Journal vergessen. Will etliche Dinge notiren, so zu behalten dienlich. Habe viel mechanico-physica von allerhand Ktinsten, Manufacturen und
     Handwerkem mit Hem. Helmonten tiberleget, und etliche Bogen damit vollgeschrieben
     (p.208) ...
205. Ibid.: "8. September... An Hm Lipper zu Liineburg wegen der Teutschen Version Conso!.
     Phils. Boetii, die er verlegen will (p. 210) ... 12. September: ... Freytag soli Exemplaria
     haben von der Harmonia Evangeliorum, die Vsserio zugeschrieben. Es sind etwa 3
     oder 4 Bogen in Druck davon gelassen worden, die hat man ausgelassen. 1st von Hm.
     Rosenroth. Soli Herzog Rud. Aug. Durchlaucht geschickt werden, aber an Hem. Herzog
     Ant. Vir. das iibrige von Messias puer (pp. 212-3) ...
206. LH I, Theologie, V, 2, 25r (9 June 1696): "Deswegen ich vor vielenjahren schon iemand
     gesuche der in allen stticken ohne zusaz oder abgang eigentlich nach der Vrhebers
     meynung besagte verse oder Reimen geben mochte: endlich auch zu Sulzbach in der
     Obem Pfalz einen in aller Philosophischen Wissenschaft wohl erfahmen Mann, Herr
     Christian Knorrn von Rosenrot angetroffen; welcher nicht allein die Lateinischen verse
     in Teutsch Reimen auf mein ansuchen zu ubersezzen auf sich genommen, sondem auch
     so glUcklich darin gewesen, daB viele verstlindige Leute zwischen dem grund-Text und
     der Ubersetzung keinen unterschied gefunden, and dafiir gehalten, man mochte mit fug
     urtheilen daB wenn beide zu gleicher zeit herfiir kommen, zu zweifeln gewesen seyn
     wtirde, welches der ursprung, und welches vom andem genommen, oder welchem der
     Vorzug gebiihre.
        Nun hat es sich kiirzlich begeben, daB ich nach Hanover gekommen und die
     Durleuchtigste Churfurstinnen zu Brandenburg und Braunschweig deselbst vorgefunden, und als ein alter bekandter diener denselben aufgewartet; da geschahe daB beyde
     Churfurstinnen mir manche Christliche und Lehrwurdige weise Fragen, ja fragen auf
     fragen, vorlegten, die erklintnis, damit Sie von Gott begab zu vermehren, nach bedeutung
     beyder Churfurstlichen Person Taufnamens, Sophia. Denn gleich wie Sie von Scheinheiligkeit und gleisnerey entfemet, also lassen Sie sich die wahre Gottesfurcht, so der
     Weisheit anfang, recht angelegen seyn, und wenden ihre Gemiiths-Krlifte an, zu erkennen
     das wahre liecht und den brunquell alles guthen, suchen auch solches nicht mit leeren
     worthen, sondem mit der that darzuthun, in dem Sie sich der von Gott verliehenen
     Hoheit bedienen vielen andem guthes zu erweisen, und reden von nichts lieber, als was
     zu diesem Hauptzweck der Erkentnis und Liebe diene kan.
        Vnter andem kam auch dieses Boetii Btichlein genant Trost der Weisheit in erwehnung
     da dann der Churfurstin zu Braunschweig durchleuchtigkeit bezeigeten daB Sie solches
     nicht allen selbst mit groBen vemtigen gelesen, sondem auch damit bey andem nuz
     geschaffet, und als Sie das von mir bekommene exemplar einer person gegeben, so in
     melancholey gefallen, solche durch lesung dessen ganz wieder recht gebracht werden,
     daher ward ich bey meinem abscheid erinnert dasselbe, wenn ich wieder nach Sulzbach
     klime, aufzusuchen und davon eine anzahl exemplarien zu iibersenden. Weilen aber wie
     vorgemeldet wenig mehr zu finden gwesen, habe ich bey meiner riickreise zum zweiten
     mahl zum druck befOrdem wollen, der hofnung daB es manchem wohlgesinten gemiith
     zur erbauung und erquickung dienen werde. Gegeben 9. junii MDCXCVI."
207. 13. September. Hr. Helmont heut friih Abschiedt genommen: geht tiber Cleve und
     Geldem nach Holland (p. 213) ... 23 September. Einen Brief von Hem. Krafft erhalten,
                                                                                     Notes      179

     darin er confirmirt, dass er mit seinen Spiritu 100 pro 100 geweinnen wolle, ob gleich
     der Span. u. Frz. Brandtwein umb 1/3 abgeschlagen. Er solI aus Fruchtbrandtwein seyn,
     und habe er eine Invention treflich compendiose ohne Helm zu distillirn. Queritur: ob
     Herm. Helmont an Hand zu gebe, darein zu inquiriren ...
        Hrn. Helmonts Adresse in Amsterdam ist bei Hrn. Christianus Messman, ist ein
     Kaufman von Hamburg bUrtig, wohnt, glaubt er, auff der Kaysers Gracht. Doch ist
     genug zu setzen a M. Christian Messerman, wei! er auff der Post bekahd seyn wird (p.
     217) ...
 26 September... Ein Urmacher zu Hi!desheim hat seinter Frauen vorigen Mannes Bruder
     bey sich, so taub und stumm, aber sehr guthe kleine Uhren machet: hat es mit Zusehen
     gelernt. Kan den Leuten allerhand mit Zeichen bedeuten und sie ihm. Er verstehet auch
     die Ziphern (p. 218).
208. G VII: 539-541 (following Klopp, Gerhardt thinks this was written in March. Aiton
     suggests it was written immediately after van Helmont's departure, Leibniz, p. 202):
     "Mr. Francis Mercury Baron of Helmont, son of the celebrated physician of that name, is
     an old acquaintance of Madam the Electress of Hanover. He had been a Roman Catholic.
     Afterwards he became a Quaker, and during the time he was at Hanover, he called himself
     a seeker. Madam the Electress used to say about him, that he didn't understand himself.
     He was dressed in a suit of brown cloth in the fashion of the Quakers. He also wore
     a coat of the same color and a hat without feathers [sans audaces], so that one would
     have taken him for an artisan rather than for a Baron. He was seventy-nine but at the
     same time very alive and alert. He knew many trades and worked, for example, at that
     of a turner, weaver, a painter, and the like. He also perfectly understood chemistry and
     medicine. He was well versed in Hebrew and was the intimate friend of Mr. Knorr,
     Chancellor of Sulzbach and author of the Kabbala denudata. He furnished him with
     many Jewish manuscripts on this matter. The Paradoxes concerning the Macrocosm
     and the Microcosm of Mr. Helmont were translated from English into German and
     printed in Hamburg. The principle opinion he maintained was that of metempsychosis,
     namely that the souls from dead bodies passed immediately into newly-born bodies, and
     that, thus, the same souls always played their parts in this theater of the world.
        I agree with all the world that animals have real sensitive souls. I maintain also with
     most of the ancients that all of nature is full of force, of life, and of souls, since one learns
     through the medium of microscopes that there are a great quantity of living creatures
     which are not perceptible to the eyes and that there are more souls than grains of sand or
     atoms. But I further maintain, as Plato already did and Pythagoras before him, who took
     this opinion for the East, that there is no soul that perishes, not even those of animals. Mr.
     Helmont agrees with me, although I cannot understand his arguments and proofs. Every
     body has parts and is nothing but a heap or multitude, like a flock of sheep, or a pond full
     of drops of water and fish, or a watch that has many springs and other necessary parts.
     But as all numbers consist of one and one, so all multitudes are composed of unites.
     Thus unites are the true source and seat of every being, of all [their] force, and of all their
     sense, and all this is nothing else than souls. From this it incontestably follows, not only
     that there are souls, but further, that everything is full of souls, what truly constitutes
     a soul, and, finally, why each souls is incorruptible. Unites have no parts, otherwise
     they would be multitudes, and what has no parts cannot decay. Thomas Aquinas has
     already said that the souls of animals are indivisible, from which it follows that they are
     incorruptible. Apparently he did not wish to explain himself more openly but contented
     himself with proposing the foundation. One might say that all this could well be but with
     very little consolation, since although our souls and those of other animals remain, they
     do not remember the past. But I am of another opinion. I acknowledge that after death we
     do not remember at first what we were, which would not be proper or seemly for nature.
     I believe, however, that whatever has once come to a soul, is eternally imprinted on it,

      although this does not always return to the memory. In the same way we know many
      things which we do not always remember unless something gives us the occasion to
      think about them. Who can remember everything? But because nothing in nature occurs
      in vain and nothing is lost, but everything tends towards its perfection and maturity, in
      the same way each image which our soul receives will finally become a whole with all
      the things that are to come in such a way that we will be able to see everything as if in
      a mirror and to take from that whatever we find most suitable for our satisfaction. From
      this it follows that the more we will practice virtue and do good works, the more joy and
      satisfaction we will have. We must then conclude from this that we must be satisfied at
      present because in doing good, everything that happens is so well ordered that we could
      not do better, even if we were very intelligent about these matters.
         Our souls are capable of knowing and of governing and they do in the little world
      what God does in the great world. They are like little Gods who make worlds that perish
      no less than the universe of which they are the image. Just like the great world, they
      also tend towards their end. From this it follows that the other souls and bodies should
      serve those that have some rapport with the divinity in order to achieve their happiness.
      But at the same time they serve these other souls, they also tend to a greater perfection
      because the world is like a body which goes to its end without any resistance, since there
     is nothing in itself that can impede it and nothing outside it that can impede it."
209. On wonders ifrhis was the alchemist Leibniz had helped to finance (see above p. 7).
210. LBr 389, f. 82 ((Borg Ie 1111 Mars 1697): "La raison de mon silence c'est rna maladie,
      laquelle a ete si violente qu'on m'a declare mort, comme j'en ay donne part a S.A.
     Madame I' Electrice, dans rna precedente du mois passe.
         Pour donner reponse avos lettres, dont la premiere parle de faire du grain de I'eau de
     vie, egale a celle du yin, et que j' en pourrais parler a Mr. Krafft comme de moy meme; je
     vous diray, que je'm'eloigne volontier de telles personnes; mais a Vous je puis dire que
     s'i! estoit a moy a faire des essais aises et sans frais,je voudrois prendre de la biere forte
     et claire de plusierus sortes, et distiler deux ou trois pots de chacune, pour voir si en la
     seconde distillation je pourrois avoir de l' eau de vie qui seroit sans mauvais goOt; afin
     que la seconde distillation, en y ajoutant de la lie du Yin (qu'on appelle Wyn droesen)
     elle pourroit acquerir Ie goOt de I'esprit de Yin. La consideration que j'ai, que Ie grain
     qu'on distille, ne peut avoir une telle vertu, c'est qu'on pretend de la faire par la violence
     du feu, et par une fermentation soudaine, ne considerant pas, que les grapes de raisin se
     fermentent doucement deux ou bien trois semaines avant qu'on en presse Ie dit most, et
     non pas yin; apres cela on Ie laisse fermenter long temps, afin qu'i! devienne yin, clair et
     propre aestre distille pour en faire de I'esprit. De meme on pourra dire de la biere qu'il
     doit avoir du temps pour fermenter doucement, afin de devenir clair et forte pour estre
     propre a donner son bon esprit, etc.
         La seconde demande, touchant mon avis ou mon opinion pour faire de grands miroirs
     de verre, s'il estoit a moy a en faire des essais je les voudrois faire d'une maniere
     naturelle, savoir qu' apres avoir bien considere des parties necessaires pour parvenir
     au but sans peine et sans frais, je voudrois prendre du Verre fin, propre a en faire des
     miroirs, et Ie piller dans un mortier de fer, qui rend Ie verre bon et noirlitre, au lieu que
     Ie cuivre Ie gate.
         Quand j'ai fait quelque fois des verres pour I'optique, j'ai mis de cette poudre, dans
     une moule faite de la craie blanche, moulue fort menue et pressee dans un cercle de fer,
     et I'ai mise dans une four, qui reverberoit a foundre, et cela se fondoit fort aisement et
     fort soudainement, Ie verre n'estant pas epais. Tout I'art et tout la peine seroit de trouver
     un four proportionne a la grandeur du verre. Mon avis seroit de Ie faire de meme comme
     on fait Ie four pour raffiner quelques centaines marcs d'argent, ou I'on remue aisement
     la Coupelle ou totis.
                                                                                  Notes      181
        Pour l'avis de Ia Princ¥sse de Chi may j'en ay donne mon sentiment Ie mois passe a
     Son Altesse Serme Madame l'Electrice. Plusieurs personnes sont imbu de moy que j'ay
     Ia Medecine universelle, et plus que je Ie denie, plus Ie croyent-ils. Mais Ies gens d' esprit
     sont persuades entierement, qU'U1ie telle Medecine ne se trouve point dans Ie monde,
     car elle seroit contre Ia nature: quaedam sunt in potestate nostra; quaedam autem non
     sunt. Pour Ia Personne malade plusieurs m'ont demande des remedes; mais n'estant pas
     Medecin, je n'ay pas l'autorite comme eux, et je ne Ia voudrois pas avoir pour ne pas
     tromper Ie monde, et a l'egard'de Ia susdite personne, qui est ce qui me pourra dire ou
     assurer, qU'eIJe pourra parfaitement estre guerie?
        Au reste j'ay lieu de soupconner qu'une Maladie est arrivee a Boetius faute de
     correction.
        Je Vous suis oblige du bon avis que Vous m'aves donne a l'egard de Ia maniere, dont
     je pourray me servir pour escrire aisement, et pour cet effetje vous envoye un Plan, pour
     faire plusieurs reponses en bref au demandes du Gentilhomme, ne sourd et muet et a
     cette heure parlant, qui fera Ia preface du Livre, vous supliant de Ia traduire au premier
     jour en Latin si vous scaves autant Ie Haman. Je souhaiterois de l' avoir pour Ie plus tard
     en trois semaines, parce qu' alors je voudrois aller en Hollande, de meme Vous trouveres
     l'entree dudit livre etc. Monsieur je demeure, comme vous savez

     H

     NB. La Medecine que Madame Ia Princesse de Chimay et plusiers autres demandent
     n'est pas universelle; mais elle est bonne et se prepare d'un Cinabre mineral, qui se
     trouve en Hongrie, comme aussi au Necker dans Ie Palatinat. J'en avois recu du Docteur
     Faust Ie Vieux, Professeur a Heydelberg. Je l'ay autrefois trouve avendre aAmsterdam
     ou on Ie vendoit a Ia mode de Hollande a grand prix. Si on Ie pouvoit avoir de Necker
     ce seroit commode. Je me suis defait du mien. Je pourray Vous en communiquer Ia
     preparation et Ia vertu a nostre entrevue."
211. LBr 389, f. 23 (1 March 1696): .....je me rapporte a nos discourse, et je serai bien
     aise d'apprendre, que vous ayes pris Ia resolution de communiquer bientost au monde
     quelques unes de vos belles et importantes pensees."
212. Ibid., f. 49 (Ter Borg, October, 1696): Monsieur et tres cher Amy.
        Vous aures ici Le 150 Aphorismes joint Ie Livre du retour des ames, auquel iesus
     entre autre Contrarie Ies douze Retours, et Au dit livre Vous trouveres audict titre inclose
     Ie titre angloise Promise du nom de I' Auteur de Livre de L'Enfer.
        Les autres escripts pour Mr. Ie Professeur de Hart pour joindre au Livre de Ia Concordance de Nouveau Testamt., que Mr. Knor de Rosenrot et l' Auteur, Vous supplie de
     lui Ies seur addresser en faisant mes baise mains, et lui dire, quil pourra faire et disposer
     a l'imprimerie en Liberte selon qui trouvera bon, puis que iay connue, quil est sage et
     discret.
        Les escripts de Mr. Knor de Rosenrot, qui S.A. Serme. Monseigr. Ie Duc Antoine
     Ulric de Bronsvic demande, pur Ie faire imprimer. je iuge a propos comme en peu de
     jours ispere daller a Amsterdam de Ies prendre avecq moy pour voir si La ie Ies peu
     mieux faire imprimer quoy faisant Vous aures part de mesme ie donnerey a S. A Le
     Serme. Je demeure Comme Vous saves, Monsieur.

     H

     De brieven konnen geaddresseert werden aen my ten Huyse van Mad. Ia Baronne de
     Merode dict Mutzfeld a Emmerick om vort te bestellen naer ter Borg.
213. Ibid., f. 53 (18 October 1696): "Je Vous remercie, Monsieur, des Aphorismes chymiques,
     du titre Anglois du livre de l'enfer, et des deux cens problemes faits en faveur de la
     revolution. J'auray soin d'envoyer a Mr Ie Professeur Hart pour M. Ie Duc Rudolfe

      Auguste, les Supplemens de L'Harmonie des Evangelistes de Mr. de Rosenroth et je
      feray savoir 11 M. Ie Duc Antoine Ulric ce que vous voul~s faire de i'autre ouvrage, dont
      Ie tritre est Messias puer.
          Je voy que les Aphorismes, qui demandent que [symbol for iron] et [symbol for
      copper] soyent joints avec [cinnabar?], sont marqu~s par une ligne, qui semble les
      effacer. Je crois que ce n'est pas sans dessein.
         Je souhaite que quantit~ de belles pens~es, que vous av~s encore dans la Metaphysique,
      Mecanique, Morale se publient de vostre vivant. Car quoyque rien ne se perde dans Ie
      monde, neanmoins si elles se publient plustost, elles pourront encore fructifier.
         Comme presque tous vos deux cens problemes sont fond~s sur la Sainte Ecriture,
      Mad. l'Electrice, qui aimeroit mieux de voir comment on pourroit encore con firmer
      davantage vos sentimens par la raison, souhaiteroit une centaine ou deux de preuves
      fond~s sur la raison, sur l'ordre et sur i'experience. Et comme les problemes n'ont
      point de liason entre eux, et sont autant de pieces detacMes, Elle seroit bien ais~ de voir
      quelque chose de sembi able 1Il'egard des raisons. Etje me souviens, Monsieur, de vous
      en avoir d~ja parl~. II suffiroit, que vous prissi~s un papier, et sans vous attacher 11 Ie
      remplir tout d'un coup par une Meditation sui vie, qui vous fatigueroit aussi bien que
      les Lecteurs, peu stil~s aux Meditations, Vous pourri~s marquer sur ce papier de temps
     en temps des preuves d~tach~es, ou indices, 11 mesure qu'elles vous tomberoient dans
      i'esprit, sans vous mettre en peine de I'ordre, ni de la liason, qu'il vous seroit ais~ de
      leur donner apres, s'il il en estoit besoin, apres avoir amass~ la matiere, d'autant plus,
      qu'il n'y a rien qui presse.
         Mad. La Duchesse d'Orieans allegue contre vostre example des lievres, l'experience
     contraire des lieux de sa connoissance, ou on les a detruits 11 force de chasser. Mais
     tout doit estre entendu avec moderation. Les Espagnols one bien detruit les hommes
     de quelques Isles de i' Amerique. La question est seulement, s'il est vray selon vostre
      sentiment, que, lorsqu'on laisse assez de quelque espece, pour propager la race, les
      naissances sont plus frequentes apres une grande mortalit~. C'est un fait qui meriteroit
     une v~rification plus exacte."
214. "Comme il pensait toujours, il jetait sur Ie papier, n'importe oil il filt, meme en voyage,
     les id~es qui lui venaient incessamment 1I1'esprit; puis il mettait de c6t~ ces brouillons,
     et ne les relisaitjamais; en effet, leur accumulation meme i'emp&hait de retrouver celui
     dont il eOt eu besoin, et il avait plust6t fait de l'~crire 11 nouveau ... " (Couturat, La Logique
     de Leibniz, pref. viii).
215. LBr 389, f. 29 (Helmstadt, 11 July 1696): "Helmontii ingenium miratus sum. Multaque
     ex viro scrutatus sum quae non nisi ex viro cognosci possent. Antiquae Philosophiae
     Pythagorico-Platonicae, Cabbalisticaeve priscae, non vestigia, sed ideam in hoc sene
     perspexi. Uti ergo antiqua isthaec philosophia moralis et symbolica, ita et arguta est,
     nostris seculis difformis. Duo principia fundamentum aedificio suggerunt: Praexistentia
     animarum, ac revolutio, aut migratio earundem! Ex his cetera fluunt omnia. Non illepidus
     quoque, uti praesentis ubique animi est."
216. Schuchard, "Swedenborg, Jacobitism, and Freemasonry," p. 362.
217. Becco, "Leibniz et Francois-Mercure van Helmont," p. 121: "La transmigration surtout
     excite ses sarcasmes; ces "pens~s extraordinaires et peut-etre all~gorique" qu'il nous
     "d~bite" pretent 11 rire. Le ton d'une lettre qu'illui envoie de Hanovre Ie 18/28 octobre
     1698 en t~moigne."
218. LBr 389, f. 104 (18/28 October, 1698): "Nous avions peur tout de bon, Madame
     I'Electrice et moy, que vous n'eussi~s ~t~ enlev~ de nouveau pour estre envoy~ une
     seconde fois 11 !'Inquisition. Vous av~s grand sujet, Monsieur, de menager maintenant
     vostre sant~, et de vous donner du repos jusqu'1Ila revolution du printemps; ou nous
     souhaitons que vous nous reveni~s avec les hirondelles; ce retour valant mieux pour
     11 present que celuy des ames. Je crois v~ritablement que les bons desseins que nous
                                                                                   Notes      183

     ne pourrons point achever dans cette presente vie, ne periront pas pour cela, ni pour
     la nature, ni meme pour nous. Mais il vaut toujours mieux d'achever icy Ie plus qu'on
     peut, pour gagner Ie temps, de sorte que je seray bien aise de voir encore beaucoup de
     vos ouvrages. 11 ne sera pas mauvais de les faire par demandes et par r~ponses. Ainsi
     ceux, qui vous parleront, vous donneront occasion d'ecrire. Je vous souhaite d'employer
     encore autant d'encre et de papier, que M. HUbener [there is an asterick in the text
     with the following note at the bottom of the page: Ceci sert admirablement bien tI faire
     adroitement remarquer tI M. de Helmont, que Madame l'Electrice nous tI fait la grace de
     nous lire la Lettre] n'en a employ~ jusqu'icy, etje suis, L."
219. Ibid., f. 129 (27 December 1698): "Je n'ay pointmanqu~ de portervostre lettre tI Madame
     l'Electrice de Bronsvic, qui vous aura r~pondu d'abord. Mais Elle m'a temoign~ plus
     particulierement ses regrets de la mort d'un aussi excellent et grand personnage, que
     l'estoit feu Mr. Ie Baron d'Helmont qu'Elle honoroit de son amite~ d'une maniere
     toute singuliere. Vous pouv~s juger, Madame, combien cette touchante nouvelle me doit
     avoir ~t~ sensible. Car je me faisois un tr~s grand plaisir de me figurer son retour dans
     l'ann~e ou nous entrons. Mais Dieu en a autrement dispos~. La solide vertu qu'il faisoit
     paroistre en toute sorte d'occasions et Ie grand z~le qu'il avoit pour Ie bien g~neral, que
     je considere comme un effect de l'amour de Dieu sur toutes choses me font esperer qu'il
     est heureux, et je crois meme que les semences de la verit~ qu'il a repandues dans Ie
     monde, ne seront pas inutiles.
        S'il a adjout~ quelque chose qui n'estoit pas entirement asseur~, cela ne fait rien. 11 est
     permis aux grands genies de proposer encore leurs conjectures. 11 seroit tI souhaiter, que
     rien ne se perdit de ses pens~es, dont il pourra avoir laiss~ des traces. Et vous juger~s,
     Madame, s'il sera tI propos d'envoyer ses papiers en quelque endroit, ou on les pourra
     garantir de la perte. Surtout il faudroit s'informer, s'il n'a rien laiss~ chez des personnes
     de sa connoissance.
        J'ay fait l'Epitaphe que voicy, potirexecuter vos ordres et pour marquer mes sentimens
     pour Ie defunct. Mais il avoit fallu un plus habile homme pour parler dignement·de luy.
     Au reste je suis
                                                                                           Leibniz
     P.S. j'espere que son dernier &rit qu'il a commenc~ chez vous, contiendra quelque chose
     d' essentiel."
220. (27 December 1698) quoted in Nicolson, Conway Letters, p. 456: "11 faut malgr~ moy
     que je vous mande la mort de Mons. Helmont."·
221. (9 January 1699) ibid.: "Les c~r~monies sont pour les Princes; nostre bon Mons. Helmont
     a ~t~ d~log~ sans trompette et sans carillon."
222. Ibid., f. 133ff. (Ter Borg, 28 June 1699): " ... Selon vOtre avis, Monsieur, j'ay fait moy
     meme un voyage en Hollande pour trouver quelcun de ses amis propre tI receuillir ce qui
     se trouve de ses papiers, et meme tI mettre par ~crit ce qu'il m'a dit de bouche pendant
     les sept dernieres semaines de son sejour chez nous. Ses derniers Ecrits ne sont que des
     preludes parsem~s neantmoins de plusieurs profondes considerations. Et a fin que rien
     ne s'en perde, et que l'on cherche partout deterrer encore ce que l'un ou l'autre en tient,
     j'ay ~t~ trouver un de ses grands amis, qui etant fort honnete et discret en veut avoir soin,
     au cas que je me releve de mes couches fort proches. Mais, s'il plait au Seigneur et ce
     Maitre de la Vie de me continuer la mienne, j'en aurai precisement soin moi-meme. J'ai
     eu beaucoup d'attaques tant des Juifs, que d'autres personnes, touchant les sentiments
     du feu Baron de Helmont. Mais je les ay renyoy~ jusqu'tI ce qu'i!s me puis sent montrer
     Ie contraire par des Preuves v~ritablement fond~es, et come la plOpart a mal con~u ses
     pens~es, jai eu occasion de leur en donner des pens~es justes et sans autre contradiction
     que d'etre contraires aux sentimens de nos Tbeolgiens; mais cette autorit~ ne prouvant
     rien tI mon avis, je crois que les Sentimens du feu Baron de Helmont, ayant l'autorit~
     de I'Ecriture, de la nature et de la raison de leur cot~, paroissent bien plus probables. Je

       cherche un livre ecrit en Latin contenant quatre cents passages de l'Ecriture sainte, pour
       prouver la Revolution que feu Mr. de Helmont avoit en main pour Ie faire imprimer, et
       come je n'en puis rien apprendre dans ces quartier-ci, je pense de Ie trouver chez vous,
       Monsieur, ou du moins d'en recevoir quelques nouvelles, pour savoir si vous l'aves
       va quelque part, puisque feu mon Cousin, en faisant son demier tour en Allemagne,
       l'avoit rC!\!u d'une Personne illustre ~ condition de Ie restituer ~ son proprietaire qui m'en
       presse, outre que j' ai ~ present une tres bonne occasion de la faire translater et imprimer
       pour ~tre utile a plusiers qui rechercent les senti mens du feu Baron de Helmont avec
       empressement. Vous me feres grand plaisir, Monsieur, si ledit Livre vous est connu,
       de m'en donner quelque nouvelle. II me souvient d'avoir oui parler mon Cousin de
       l'impression de ce live; mais l'endroit m'est echappe de la memoire. Dans cette attent
      je Vous souhaite le.vray bien ... "
223. Ibid., f. 135 (25 August 1699): "Vous faites conformement ~ la demiere volonte de feu Mr
       Vostre Oncle, quoyqu'il ne vous l'ait point dites, en travaillant ~ conserver ses pensees. II
       ne nous ajamais monstre ce livre des passages de l'Ecriture, dont vous paries, et il faudra
       Ie chercher par tout ailleurs plustost que chez nous; peut-estre qu'il se trouve ~ Sulzbac.
       Je voudrois, qu'on pUblilit des Memoires de sa vie, qui seroient curieux et instructifs;
       mais je crois que c'est encore ~ Sulzbac, qu'ilIes faudroit chercher, et voudrois qu'on
       fit un receuil de ce qu'il a fait imprimer. Le mal est, qu'il m'a avoue lui-m~me, que la
       pluspart des ses livres n'estoient pas entierement, mais seulment en partie, conformes
       ~ ce qu'il croyoit veritablement. Je voudrois aussi que ses decouvertes Physiques et
       Mecaniques ne se perdissent point, et qu'on donnlit, par exemple, la Description et
       figure de son instrument pour filer ~ deux mains, et autres choses semblables.
           Lorsque M. d'Helmont fut la demiere fois chez nous, it filt trouve par un homme
       de Danzic, qui avoit fort paru donner dans ses sentimens. II ne nous en a pas dit Ie
       nom; peut-etre que ce personnage, si on Ie connoissoit, pourroit donner des nouvelles de
       l'Ouvrage de Question.
224. Leibniz is probably referring to Philipp Wilhelm, Duke of Neuburg, who had van
       Helmont arrested and imprisoned by the Inquisition. See Coudert, "A Quaker-Kabbalist
      Controversy," and ''The Kabbala Denudata: Converting Jews or Seducing Christians."
225. LBr 389, ff. 142ff: ..... Quelques curieux m'ont demande des particularites de la Vie de
      Mr. Helmont. Je crois qu'il faudra avoir recours pour cela ~ M. Le Prince Regent de
      Sulzbac, qui Ie connoist de plus loin.
           Si Ie bon homme avoit continue de vivre et d'ecrire, il auroit eu une guerre formeUe
      avec les Theologians, quelqu'un entre eux a deja donne une Theologie Helmontienne
      dans une Dissertation, imprimee ~ Helmstadt, ou il ne parle pourtant que de la Religion
      du pere, Jean Baptiste van Helmont, fameux Medecin et Chymiste, qui avoit mele aussi
      la Religion avec la Physique. Mais comme Ie fils l'a fait incomparablement d'avantage,
      ce m~me Auteur, qui a ecrit contre Ie pere, mena~oit Ie fils d'une pareiUe dissertation.
      En ce cas je luy aurois conseille de faire une alliance avec Mr. Ie Raugrave; comme
      de l'autre coste j'aurois voulu procurer des Allies ~ Mr. Helmont. Car il n'y a pas long
      temps qu'on a imprime un petit livre ~ Paris sous Ie titre de Meditations Metaphysiques
      qui tend ~ etablir aussi la Transmigration des ames. C' est dommage que cette grande
      guerre, qui nous auroit foumi un Opera, est tombee par la mort du bon homme. Je ne
      s~ay si c' est un ecoulement de son arne, comme il disoit, mais je s~ay tousjours que c' est
      son idee qui nous donne encore du plaisir... "
226 ...... Leibniz prend la Cabale sous sa protection... Ces echos [des Cabbalistes] confirment
      l'inter~t singulier que Leibniz avait accorde ~ la Cabale et au Cabalisme de Spinoza"
      (Friedmann, Leibniz et Spinoza, p.-156).
227. "Knorrium ait autor non tam Cabbalam seu philosophiam occultam Hebraeorum quam
      inania assumenta denudasse: Sed Knorrius dedit utrumque ut invenit, bonum et malum"
      (Foucher de Careil, Refutations, p. 6).
                                                                                Notes     185
228. "Cabalistae videntur dicere materiam nec creari ob vilitatem essentiae nec existere posse,
     proinde vel null am esse in universo materiam, vel spiritum et materiam unum idemque
     esse, ut habet Henricus Morus in thesibus Cabalisticis. Spinosa quoque negat ullam
     massam corpoream et materialem quae sit subjectum hujus mundi a Deo creari potuisse,
     quia inquit ex qua divina potentia creari potuerit dissentientes ignorant. Est aliquid
     in his veri, sed credo non satis intellectum. Materia revera est, sed non substantia,
     cum sit aggregatum seu resultans ex substantiis: de materia in quantum secunda seu
     massa loquor extensa quae minime homogeneum est corpus. Sed id quod homogeneum
     concipimus et materiam primam vocamus, id est aliquid incompletum cum sit mere
     potentiale. Substantia autem plenum est aliquid atque activum" (Foucher de Careil, ed.,
     Refutations, pp. 26--8).
229. "Verissimum est, Spinosam Cabala Hebraeorum esse abusum: et quidam qui ad Judaeos
     defecit et se Mosem Germanum vocavit, pravas ejus sententias prosecutus est, ut ex refutatione hominis Germanica a Dno. Wachtero, qui eum noverat, scripta patet. Sed fortasse
     Hebaei ipsi et alii veteres, praesertim commodum itidem sensum admittunt; Spinosa
     vero ex combinatione Cabalae et Cartesianismi, in extremitates corruptorum, monstrosum suum dogma formavit, neque intellexit naturam sustantiae verae seu Monadis ... (G
     III: 545).
230. Garber & Askiew, eds., pp. 37-38.
231. "5. I concluded... that we must not mix up indifferently, or confuse, minds or rational
     souls with other forms or souls, for they are of a superior order and have incomparably
     more perfection than have the forms which are sunk in matter, which I believe are found
     everywhere. For, in comparison with these, minds or rational souls are as little gods
     made in the image of God and having in them some ray of the light of the Divinity. This
     is why God governs minds as a prince governs his subjects or indeed as a father cares
     for his children, while he deals with other substances, instead, as an engineer handles
     his machines. Minds thus have special laws which place them beyond the revolutions
     of matter, and one can say that all the rest is made only for them, these revolutions
     themselves being adapted to the happiness of the good and punishment of the evil" (LII:
     742). The idea that "minds" are like the "children" of God is also in section 36 of the
     Discourse.
232. Garber & Askiew, eds, p. 71, axiom 24.
233. I thank Dr. Eva Engel-Holland for this interesting piece of information.
234. This subject has been much debated. Ludwig Stein argues against this idea. He points out
     that Leibniz only mentions Bruno's name in 1666, 1682, and 1690. In 1691 he referred
     to Bruno's De Monade, but he did not seem to know much about Bruno's philosophy
     as a whole. In a letter to La Coze in 1708 Leibniz mispelled the title of Bruno's Lo
     Spaccio as "specchio," which, according to Stein, shows he had no clear idea of Bruno's
     philosophy (Stein, Leibniz und Spinoza, pp. 198, 201, 204, 206). Thouverez believes
     that Leibniz did borrow the term from Bruno, but he recognizes the influence of van
     Helmont and von Rosenroth in orienting Leibniz's philosophy in the direction of the
     monadology. Brehier also come out in favor of Bruno (Histoire de la Philosophie, ii,
     premo partie, p. 247).
235. LBr 389, ff. iff. (1696): "Leibnitii lene iudicium de Fr. Mercurii Helmontii doctrinis:
        Es ist nicht ohne, daB meines Ermessen von Herrn Helmonts Sachen viel noch dunckel
     und unbewiesen blieben, und zwar sonderlich sein haupt-artikel von der Seelen Leibwechsel, dass sie nehmlich aus den todten copern gleich wieder in frische Leiber ziehen,
     und also stets einerley Seelen auf diesen Schauplaz spielen sollen. Er meinet zwar
     dergestalt; es bleibe allezeit ohngefehr einerley Zahl der Menschen auf Erden, so wohl
     als von einem iedem andern geschlecht der Thiere; ich solte aber fast aus den Historien daran zweifeln, und glauben, daB die Welt nicht allemahl gleich bewohnet. Und
     weiss ich nicht, ob man mit Grunde sagen konne, daB eben deswegen anderswo mehr

       Wt>lfe enstanden, wei! die WOlfe in England ausgerottet worden. Es wird sich auch
       aus dem gedruckten Taufe und Sterb Registern der Stadt Londen finden, daB nach der
       groBen Pest der Abgang nicht eben durch eine so ilberaus groBe zahl der Gebuhrten,
       sondern durch Zulauff neuer Einwohner ersetzet worden. Inzwischen ist nicht ohne, daB
       alsdann mehr und friihere Heyrahten geschehen, wei! die Leute nach sol chern grossen
      Aufrliumen mehr Plaz zur Nahrung finden, und also sich wiedermehren. Inzwischen
       bin ich in vielen dingen mit ihm einig, worin weder den gemeinen Lehrslizen, noch
      den neuen Meynungen der Cartesianer beypfliehten kan. In gemein sagt man die Thiere
      hatten Seel und Leben, aber solche Seele vergienge mit der Zerstorung ihres COrper:
      den Menschen allein nimt man aus; welches manchem verdlichtig vorkomt. Zumahl
       wenn man deswegen sich bloB auf den Glauben beruffen will, so einem behelff iihnlich
       scheinet. Die Cartesianen, solcher sehend und besorgend, daB, wenn der Thiere Seelen sterblich, auch diese, eben der Menschen, gleiche Gefahr lauffen mOchten, haben
      fiirgegeben, der Mensch allein batte wahrhaftig eine Seele; die Thiere aber seyen nichts
      anders als Kilnstliche uhrwercke, von feuer und windt getrieben, ohne aIle empfindung, also daB, ihrer meinung nach, die thiere, wenn sie schreyen, nicht mehr filhlen,
       als eine orgelpfeiffe. Allein es wiederspricht ihnen starck die ganze Natur, welche auf
       viele weise zuerkennen gibt, dass bey den Thieren auch eine Empfindung, und sie keine
       bloBe puppen oder marionetten seyn. Man siehet auch cllirlich, dass die Cartesianen ihre
      Meinung nieht auf die Vernunfft, oder Erfahrung, sondern auf ihre Eigentliebe grUnden,
       wei! sie sich selbst liebkosen, und nur dasienige annehmen wollen, was die menschliche
       Natur hoch erhebet, gleich als wenn das wahr seyn milsste, was man gem hlitte; wiewohl
       sie inzwischen nicht unrecht haben, wenn sie aIle Seelen hierin ubereins nehmen, und
      begreiffen, daB sie entweder aIle sterblich, oder aIle unsterblich seyn milssen. Ich bin
      demnach mit der gemeinen Lehre darin einig, daB die Thiere wahrhaftig Seelen und
      Empfindung haben; ja ich batten mit vielen alten wei sen Lehren damr, daB alles in der
      ganzen Natur voll Kraft, Leben und Seelen sey. Wie dem folget, daB jemehr man Tugenden gehabt, und Gutes getan, je grOBer denn auch die Freunde and Vergnilgung seyn
      werde. Dessen ich noch viel mehr GrUnde aufilhren kOnte, daraus zu schlieBen daB man
      bereits iezo ursach hat vergnugt zuseyn, nicht allein wei! alles, was seyn wird, seyn muB,
      sondem auch wei! alles, was geschicht, so wohl geordnet, daB wir es selbst, wenn wir es
      selbst recht verstunden, nich besser wunschen wilrden. Und hierum ist der Unterscheid
      zwischen den vernunftigen, und andern Seelen, daB die versorgen der Wissenschafften
      und regirung flihig, mithin einigermaBen in ihrem bezirck und kleine welt das thun, was
      Gott in der ganzen welt: also selbst wie kleine GOtter kleine welten machen, die so wenig
      vergehen, oder sich verlieren, als die groBe, deren sie bilde seyn. Sondern vielmehr sich
      mit der Zeit ihrem Zweck niihren, wie auch die grosse welt mit ihnen thut. Daher dann
      auch die ilbrige Seelen, und aIle Corper, denen Seelen, die allein mit dem groBen Gott
      in einer art von Gesellschafft und Vereinigung stehen, zu ihrer gluckselligkeit dienen
      mussen; wiewohl sie durch solch ihr dienen auch selbst immer zu mehrer vollkommenheit gelangen. Denn die ganze welt ist wie ein Leib, der ohne hinderung zu seinem zweck
      fortschreitet, wei! nichts von sich selbst aIlein gehindert werden kan, und nichts auBer
      ihr ist, so sie hindern kOnne. Was die Sonne betrifft, so ist nicht ohne, dass wir in ihrem
      bezirck begriffen: dem nunmehr ausgemacht, daB die Erde selbst, die wir bewohnen,
      und beherschen, niehts anders sey, als einer der Planeten, so umb die stillstehende
      Sonne herumb gehen. DaB aber die hayden die Sonne vor den Siz des AllerhOchsten
      gehalten, dann haben sie geirret, wei! sie das weltgebau nicht verstanden. Anitzo weiB
      man, daB ein jeder Fixstern eine eigne Sonne sey, die allen Ansehen nach auch seine
      Planeten, oder Zugeordnete welten hat, wie unsre Sonne. So zweifle auch nicht, dass
      aIle Sonnen zugleieh einer hohen Regierung unterworffen, und das aIle solche Regenten wiederumb regiret werden; wiewohl endlich alles unter dem allerhochsten Regirer
      stehet. Und daher flinget man erst zu unser Zeit an, das geheimnis der kleinen sowohl
                                                                           Notes      187
als grossen welt zuerkennen, nachdem eines theils derumblauf des bluts in uns, andem
theils der wahre himmelslauff durch die femgl!isser reeht entdecket worden. Fahren die
Menschen so fort, wie sie innerhalb 100 Jahren gethan; so werden sich noch wunderbare
sch()ne dinge von der Nature zeigen, und immer mehr Ursachen dargeben, deren Urheber
hochzusch!itzen, und ein gefallen an seinem Thun zu haben. Es w!ire zuwunschen gewesen daB der groBe Konig in Franckreich von etlich 30 Jahren her, an statt des Krieges
der Europa unglilcklich gemacht, durch befOrderung der Wissenshaften, wie er angefangen, der Menschen Gluckseeligkeit femer vermehren wollen, oder konnen; so wurden
wir schon viel erlebet haben, so erst unsere Nachkommen sehen werden, Nichts desto
weniger bin der meinung, daB zumahl hohe personen, die viel gutes schaffen konnen,
nicht unterlassen sollen soIches zuthun, wenn auch gleich nach langer zeit der Nuz davon
erscheinen konte, nicht nur wegen des Ruhms, sondem auch weil gewiB daB diejenige,
die etwas gutepflanzen [sic], und doch den aufgang hier nicht erleben, dennoch die
frilchte davon zu ihrer mehrem herrligkeit dermahleins genieBen werden, indem solches
die unver!inderliche hochste ordnung mit sich bringet... [A break in the text appears
here] auch die Gl!isser unz!ihlbare lebende sonst unsichtbare Gesch()pfe zeigen, also daB
der Seelen ungleich mehr seyn als Komer oder Sonnen st!iublein. Allein ieh stehe auch
dabeneben in den Gedancken die schon Plato gehabt, und vor ihm Pythagoras aus den
Morgenl!indem mit sich gebracht, daB keine Seele vergehe; auch nicht einst die Seele
eines thiers. Herr Helmont ist auch hierinn gleicher Meynung mit mir; wiewohl ich
seinen beweiB oder grund noch nicht gnugsam sehen konnen. Meinen grund belangend,
so habe ich einsmahl deswegen mit dem berilhmten Herrn Arnaud, weiland Haupt der
Jansenissen, briefe geweehselt, und mich haupts!ichlich darauf beruffen, daB aIle Corper
theile haben, mithin nichts anders seyn, also hauffen oder vielheiten, wie eine heerde
schaffe, oder ein teich voll wassertropfen und fische, oder wie ein urwerck voll r!ider und
zugehor, aber gleich wie aIle zahlen bestehen aus eins und eins, also mussen aIle vielheiten bestehen aus einigkeiten. Derowegen sind die Einigkeiten die reehte wurzel, und
der Sitz alles Wesens, aller Krafft, und aller Empfindung; und dies sind die Seelen. Hat
man also hierinn einen unwiedertreiblichen beweiB, nicht nur daB Seelen seyn, sondem
auch daB alles voll Seelen seyn musse, und worinn eine Seele eigentlich bestehe, auch
endlich, warumb eine jede Seele unzerstorlich sey. Denn die Einigkeiten haben keine
Theile sonst w!irens vielheiten; was aber keine Theile hat, ist unzerstOrlich. Herr Arnauld
selbst, so scharfsinnig er auch war, nachdem ers recht eingenommen, hat niehts dagegen
zusagen gewuBt, als nur, daB ihm die sach wunderlich, frembd, und neu vorkomme. fch
finde aber, dass ein hochberilhmter Lehrer der Romischen Kirchen, den man nennet S.
Thomas von Aquino, eben so gar weit nieht hiervon entfemet, weil er saget, daB auch
der Thiere Seelen ohntheilbar seyn: daraufs denn ihre ohnsterbligkeit folget, welche
er vielleicht nicht so deutlich heraus sagen wollen, sondem sich vergnuget den Grund
zulegen.
    Man mochte aber darauf femer einwenden, daB zwar alles, was ich sage, wahr seyn
moge; aber doch wenig Trost gebe denn obgleich unsere und andere Seelen bleiben, so
verliere sich doch die Erinnerung des gegenw!irtigen. Ich habe aber davon eine andere
Meinung, und ob zwar nicht ohne ist, daB wir uns vielleicht nicht so gleich nach dem
Tode des iezigen Thuns besinnen, welcher wohl der Natur nicht gem!iB, noch anstandig;
so hatte doch dafilr, daB alles, was uns einmahl wiederf!ihret, vor ewig der Seelen
eingedrilcket bleibe; ob er gleieh nieht iedesmahl einf!illet: gleieh wie wir viel dinge
wissen, deren wir uns nicht erinnen, wenn nicht eine besondere ursach dazu gelegenheit
gibt, und uns daran dencken machet. Denn wer kan immer an alles dencken? Weilen
aber gleiehwohl in dec. Natur niehts vergebens, noch verlohren gehet. Sondem alles zu
seiner vollkommenheit und reiffe kommet; so wird auch jedes bildnis so unsre Seele
angenommen, dermahleins mit dem Kunfftigen dergestalt ein gantzes machen, dass man

      alles endlich gleich als in einem hellen spiegel wird uberblicken, und das beste daraus
      zu einer mehrem vergnfigung nehmen konnen. Daraus denn folget...
236. Grua I: 140 (29 September 1698): ..... 11 (Helmont) m'a donne un exemplaire de son
      livre sur Ie commencement de la Genese. 11 est aussi du sentiment d'Origene. Je me
      souviens qu'il m'a dit que M. Wetstein It Amsterdam I'a imprime en latin apres une
      edition angloise [Grua inserts the following note here, "Alibi cachant sa collaboration"]'
      11 y en a aussi une en allemand. 11 a plusiers pensees fort bonnes, mais il en a aussi dont
     je ne vois point la preuve: comme est particulierement sa Metempsychose. Au rest, je
      l' estime becucoup pour plusieurs raison ... "
237. Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~ois-Mercure van Helmont."
238. "Quandam sententias amici exprimere voluerim... [m]ultas etiam meas meditationes
      admiscui, non abhorrentes a nonnullis amici sententiis." As Becco (Ibid., p. 128) points
      out, Grua left out the all-important "non" before abhorrentes in his version of the text (I:
      98). See the original MS (LH I, V, ad 2, g). As reported In Unschuldige Nachrichten von
     Alten and Neuen Theologischen Sachen, Leibniz revealed his interest in van Helmont's
      interpretation of Genesis in a letter to Herman von der Hardt: "Von dem Francisco
      Mercurio Helmontio schreibet der Herr von LeibnitzldaB er gar ingenieus und von
      scharffsinnigen Conjecturen sey. Er halt zwar gar zu viel auff die Cabbala und mysteria
      apicum, doch konne auch hierunter biBweilen etwas gutes seyn. Er mOchte gerne jemand
      habenlder seine meditata fiber etliche Schrifft-Stellen, absonderlich tiber den Anfang des
      ersten Buchs Mosis/in Ordnung brachte" (1716, p. 150).
239. Cogitationes super quatuor priora capita ... Genesis, p. 3 (also in Grua, I: 98): ..... Haque
      creatio ex nihilo non fundatur in scriptura Sacra, sed potius in quadam traditione; &
      sano sensu quidem accipi potest, sed, ut vulgo sumitur, errore non caret. Verum quidem
      est, non extitisse Chaos vel Atomos, vel aliud materiale Deo coeternum, ex quo factus
      sit Mundus; sed tamen falsum est mundum proprie ex nihilo, quasi ex materia, factum
      esse, cum aeterna veritatis est, ex nihilo nihil fieri. Rectius igitur dicitur cum autore
     epistolae ad Hebraeo s cap. 11. verso 3, Visibilia ex invisibilibus esse facta, id est in
     Mundo eminente ipsius Aelohim latuisse ideali quodam, seu spirituali modo, semina
     hujus mundi corporei, quae tandem aliquando fuere producta et exclusa."
240. Ibid., p. 17 (Grua I: 99): ..... Vidit, Consideravit, cogitavit; intra se quidem, sed tamen
     tanquam objectum It se diversum: talis autem visio revera quaedam productio est per
     verbum Mentis, ut jam aliquoties notatum est. Nec ita debet accipi, ut vulgo solent, ac si
     Elohim creasset prius lucem, deinde vidisset velut per experimentum, quod esset bona.
     Qui modus bopitatem rerum videndi indignus est Deo, cui con venit videre res a prior,
     imo indignum est omni sapiente facere primum & deinde considerare an bene sit factum;
     far primo, e pensar puoi, ut Hali dicunt. Revera igitur, dum vidit fecit, vel dum vidit
     dixit, vel dum vidit quod esset bona, voluit; dum voluit, fecit."
241. KD, I, 2: 308-312. This dialogue was later translated into English as A Cabbalistical
     Dialogue in Answer to the Opinion ofa learned Doctor in Philosophy and Theology, that
     the World was made of Nothing ... London, 1682. In "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic
     Circle," p. 83, Brown suggests that Leibniz may have been influenced by ''Theses
     Cabbalisticae" that appear in the first volume of the KD as well (I, 2: 150-72) and
     also by the 16 kabbalistic thesis prefacing More's "Fundamenta Philsophiae" (KD I, 2:
     293-307). But I would argue for the influence of van Helmont's short treatise because
     it lacks the mythological intricacies of the Lurianic system described in the ''Theses
     Cabbalisticae" and expresses kabbalistic ideas in a more philosophical sense and would
     therefore have appealed more to Leibniz.
242. Grua II: 509, 570.
243. "Ad Fundamenta Cabbalae Aeto-Paedo-Melissaeae Dialogus," KD I, 2: 309: " ... particula Ex tantum est characteristica materiae; nec proprie ad spiritum pertinet; qui tamen
     potissimum est creationis proprie dictae subjectum: deque hoc nullatenus dici potest,
                                                                                     Notes      189

     quid fit vel non fit ex aliquo, sed tantum quod ab aliquo: sicut nee dicimus ideam fieri ex
     anima, vel mente, sed ab illa: vel spiritus creati radios fieri ex centro (nisi fort~ localiter)
     sed h centro: vel manus ali ave angeli apparentis membra formalia fieri ex angelo, sed ab
     illo."
244. Aiton, Leibniz, pp. 206-7.
245. "Ad Fundamenta Cabbalae Al:\to-Paedo-Melissaeae Dialogus," KD I, 2: 310-11: "Materia, qua talis non est spiritus; sed illa ipsa tantum substantia, quae sub forma materiae
     apparet, in caecitate nimirum & quiete illa, atq; privatione prioris felicitatis, aliquando
     spiritus fuisse, & adhuc fundamentaliter & radicaliter talis esse, & talis aliquando iterum
     fore formaliter, diceretur... materiamJactam statuerem ~ coalitione monadum spiritualium torpentium... [po 311] quippe cjus definitionem ne unicus quidem terminus positivus
     jure merito ingredi debet ... "
246. Ibid., p. 311: "Materia qua talis, seu formaliter considerata non tantum non existit ex se,
     sed ne existit quidem positiv~, sed privativ~, sed privativ~, sicut umbra, quies, &.
247. Coudert, "Henry More, the Kabbalah, and the Quakers," p. 38ff.
248. KD I, 2: 312: "Essentiam autem diviam essentiam... dividi posse, non admittimus, sed
     unitatem in ea quam maxim~ veneramur. Sicut ex. gr. cum in fonte quodam limpidissimo occultae latent particulae aliquae terrestres & petrosae, & illae deinceps separantur
     & concrescunt, nemo dicit fontem dividi in lapillos, sed lapillos separari: ita Creator
     primo quidem produxit infinitas spirituum myriades, cum ipso in summo felicissimae
     perfectionis gradu unitas ... ita ut Deus esset omnia in omnibus: deinde autem ob varios
     adhibiti arbitrii proprii gradus, horum facta est secretio, tot graduum, quot sunt cognitionis; ad extremem usque, qui est istius privatio; adeoque mors illa, aliquando iterum
     absorbenda... hae particulae ~ qui bus mundus materialis constat, non possunt dici, esse
     Divina Essentiae, sed illius naturae, quae h divina Essentia effecta, constituta, producta,
     facta, creata, extra posita fuit. Potestque constrictio haec vocari somnus ... vel mors, &.
     Et evigilatio... quae h nobis vocatur Secretio scintillarum, tot habet gradum ascens(}s,
     quot statui possunt descens(}s; quorum extrema tamen non sunt alia, quam ultima Deo
     contrapositio in statu mortis, & summa cum Deo unio, (Hcet non unitas:) ... "
249. G III: 260. Letter to Thomas Burnett (1699; exact date uncertain): "Dans les corps
     je distingue la substance corporelle de la matiere, et je distingue la matiere premiere
     de la seconde. La matiere seconde est un aggrege ou compose de plusieurs substances
     corporelles, comme un trouppeau est compose de plusieurs animaux. Mais chaque animal
     et chaque plante aussi est une substance corporelle, ayant en soy Ie principle de l'unite,
     qui fait que c'est veritablement une substance et non pas un aggrege. Et ce principe
     d'unite est ce qu'on appelle Ame ou bien quelque chose, qui a de l'analogie avec I'ame.
     Mais outre Ie principe de 1'unite la substance corporelle a sa masse ou sa matiere seconde,
     qui est encor un aggrege d' autres substances corporelles plus petites, et cela va hi' infini.
     Cependant la matiere primitive ou la matiere prise en elle meme est ce qu'on con~oit
     dans les corps, tous les principes de l'unite mis h part, c'est h dire ce qu'il y a de passif,
     d' ou naissent deux quaHtes: resistentia et resitantia vel inertia."
250. Garber, "Leibniz and the Foundations of Physics: The Middle Years," p. 68.
251. GIll: 227: "Mon opinion est donc que la matiere n'estant qu'une chose essentiellement
     passive, la pensee et meme l'action n'en s~auroient estre les modifications, mais de
     la substance corporelle complete qui r~oit son accomplissement de deux constitutifs,
     s~avoir du principe actif et du principe passif, dont Ie premier s'appelle forme, arne,
     entelechie, force primitive, et Ie second s'appelle matiere premiere, solidite, resistence."
252. Describing this letter, Wilson says: " ... he tells de VoIder that matter is not, strictly
     speaking, an aggregate of monads, but that, in more precise terms, the pehenomena of
     aggregates arise from the reality of monads" (Wilson, Leibniz's Metaphysics, p. 192).
253. L II: 863-4.
254. L. J. Russell, ''The Correspondence betweeen Leibniz and de Voider."

255. Letter to de Voider (G II: 275): "Ego vero non tollo corpus, sed ad id quod est revoco,
      mass am enim corpoream quae aliquid praeter substantias simplices habere creditur, non
      substantiam esse ostendo, sed phaenomenon resultans ex substantiis simplicibus quae
      solae unitatem et absolutam realitatem habent."
256. L II: 830.
257. Ibid.: 832.
258. L II: 840.
259. Ibid.: 873-4.
260. Ross, Leibniz, p. 100.
261. L II: 908.
262. Garber & Askiew, eds., p. 77.
263. Ibid., pp. 74-5.
264. Theodicy, par. 20, p. 135.
265. L II: 904-5.
266. Coudert, Alchemy, p. 28.
267. See the articles by Sheppard in the bibliography.
268. Goltz, "Zur Geschichte der Sublimation."
269. Pagel, Joan Baptista van Helmont, p. 10.
270. Ibid., p. 35.
271. J. B. van HeImont, Oriatrike, p. 29.
272. Pagel, "J. B. Van Helmont, De Tempore, and biological time."
273. A similar leap from my tho-poetic thought to science was made by Kekule, who admitted
      that musing about the ancient gnostic symbol of the ouroboros led him to the structure
      of the benzene ring. Coudert, Alchemy, p. 147; Rudofsky & Wotiz, "Psychologists and
      the Dream Accounts of August Kekule."
274. Ross, Leibniz, pp. 43-4.
275. Loernker, Struggle for Synthesis.
276. The literature on whether or not Leibniz's philosophy is determinist is enormous, as
     a look through Studia Leibnitiana and collections of essays on Leibniz makes readily
     apparent. For an interesting argument see Pauline Phemister's article. I support her
     argument that Leibniz defined freedom in terms of rationality and activity, although on
     different grounds.
277. L I: 226.
278. Wilson, Leibniz's Metaphysics, p. 91.
279. L I: 227-8. See N. Rescher, "The Infinite analysis of Contingent Truths."
280. Ross, Leibniz, p. 112.
281. L I: 205 (1670--1).
282. Leibniz often referred to "Fatum Mahometanum" to describe a false conception of
     necessity which led to fatalism and inaction (see Theodicy, pp. 54-5).
283. Quoted in Seidler,"Freedom and Moral Therapy in Leibniz,". pp. 31-2.
284. Theodicy, preface, p. 52.
285. Ibid., par. 101, p. 179.
286. Ibid., par. 102.
287. Seidler, "Freedom and Moral Therapy in Leibniz," p. 22.
288. Theodicy, par. 64, p. 158.
289. Theodicy, par. 32-3, pp.142-3.
290. Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. Moshe Idel does not believe that Luria's
     theories were a response to the expUlsion of the Jews from the Iberian peninsula. He
     argues instead that the Lurianic Kabbalah simply developed exisiting kabbalistic ideas
     (Kabbalah: New Perspectives, p. 265).
                                                                                 Notes      191

291. "De Revolutionibus Animarum," KD II, 2: 415: ..... nihil in mundo est, ne quidem inter
     Silentia, v. gr. pulvis terrae atque laipdes, cui non sit vita quaedam, & natura Spritualis,
     & planeta suus atque praefectus in supernis."
292. Josef Schlomo Delmedigo, quoted in G. Scholem, "Seleenwanderung," p. 103: "Und
     Gott hebt sie allmlihlich von Stufe zu Stufe; zuert bringst er sie in Gilgul in Gestein,
     von dort in Pflanzen, von dort in Tiere, von dort in Heiden und Sklaven, und von dort in
     Israeliten. "
293. KD II, 2: 419: ..... qui discipulus Sapientum est, cibosq; suos comedit debita attentione:
     elevare & restituere potest multas animas revolutas. Qui vero non attentus est, ille non
     tantum nihil restituit, sed damnis quoqu; afficitur ab illis." On the subject of earing as
     a metaphor for the unio mystica see Moshe Idel, Kabbalah, p. 70ff. and Louis Jacobs,
     "Eating as an act of worship in Hasidic Thought."
294. Genesis [English version], p. 76; Latin edition, p. 40.
295. Idel, Kabbalah, p. 179.
296. Ibid., p. 170.
297. Copenhaver, Hennetica, p. 41.
298. H. C. Agrippa, Three Books of Occult Philosophy, p. 460.
299. Quoted in C. H. Josten, Truth's Golden Harrow, p. 97.
300. A. E. Waite, ed., The Hermetic Museum, 2 vols (1893), repro London: Robinson &
      Watkins, 1973, p. 93.
301. H. Kopp, Die Alchemie in iilterer und neuer Zeit. Heidelberg, 1886, I: 254.
302. Schuler, "Spiritual Alchemies."
303. Yates, "The Hermetic Tradition in Renaissance Science," p. 263.
304. See, for example, Hesse, "Hermeticism and Historiography: An Apology for the Internal
     History of Science;" Vickers, "Frances Yates and the Writing of History;" "Analogy and
     Identity;" "On the Function of Analogy in the Occult;" Westman & McGuire, Hermeticism and the Scientific Revolution; Schmitt, "Reappraisals in Renaissance Science."
305. Popkin, Pagel, Dobbs, Webster, and Merkel & Debus. For a thorough analysis of Leibniz's indebtedness to occultism, see Knecht.
306. Ross, Leibniz, p. 5. Couturat suggested this in La Logique de Leibniz, p. 131, note 3.
307. Yates, The Art of Memory, pp. 387-88, note 5. Leibniz's memoranda describing the
     Society of Sciences he envisoned is also in line with Rosicrucian ideals (Foucher de
     Careil, ed., Oeuvres 7: 599-618; see also Klopp, Die Werke von Leibniz 10: 328-30).
308. Two Hundred Queries, pp. 163ff.
309. Theodicy, preface, pp. 58-9.
310. On this issue see D. P. Walker's classic study The Decline of Hell.
311. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, De L'Horizon de la Doctrine Humaine (1693);
      'A1to1C(XtlX<TtlXm~ 1tclVtroV (La Restitution universelle (1715)). Textes inedits, traduits
     et annot6s par Michel Fichant: idem, "Ewige Wiederkehr oder unendlicher Fortschrifft:
     die Apocatastasisfrage bei Leibniz." I am extremely grateful to Salvatore Tedesco for
     telling me about Fichant's important work.
312. It is difficult to know precisely how to translate Leibniz's title, which he gave in French
     as "Horizon de la Doctrine Humaine" and in Latin as "Horizon Doctrinae Humanae"
     (Ficant, p. 39), in order to make it clear that Leibniz was only referring to those thoughts
     which could be enunciated and written down. As Leibniz says, "Etje donne l'exclusion
     icy ll. toutes ces choses qui ne s~auroient estre enonrees. C'est pourquoy j'ay voulu
     appeller cette estime du nom de I'Horizon de la doctrine humaine, et non pas de la
     pens6e ou de l' esprit humain, car tout ce qui appartient ll. la doctrine est enon~able.
     J'entens les enontiations qu'on peut mettre par 6crit; et je distingue entre enon~able et
     pronon~able" (Ibid., 41).
313. See Fichant's article in Studia Leibnitiana, which is described in the resum6 as follows:
     "L'article examine les pr6suppos6s de l'argument de Leibniz du point de vue de sa

     conception de la connaissance historique. II esquisse ensuite quelques points saillants
     de l'histoire du mot et de l'id~ d' ct7rOKctTciuTmnc; It partir d'Orig~ne et du stolcisme
     tardif, afin de degager Ie sens original que leur confere Leibniz. Enfin, il montre que la
     loi de continuite et l'id~ d'harmonie, qui govement Ie cours des choses, permettent It
     Leibniz de surmonter la contrainte apparente de l'argument tire de la Combinatoire: une
     perspective de progr~s infini s'ouvre alors aux esprits 'qui connaissent et reeherchent la
     verite'; il n'y a pas poureux 'd'horizon de leur science future,' ni de retour It I'identique"
     (p. 133).
314. It is interesting to see how these various sources overlap. Writing to Leibniz about the
     eventual restitution of all things (22 February 1698), Morell mentions Jane Leade, a
     leader of the Philadelphians, Gichtel, the editor of Boehme, and Origen in the same
     breath: ..... une Maistre angloise, Jeane Leade, laquelle va plus avant et parle de la
     restitution de toutes choses cr~s, non seulement de tout l'abre Adamique, mais aussi
     des Demons ce qui a ete l'opinion d'Origene. M. Gichtel vous pourra enyoyer ces livres
     et a contribue It les faire imprimer, quoiqu'il n'approuve point toutes les opinions de
     cette Leade" (Grua I: 124).
315. Theodicy, par. 147, pp. 215-6.
316. Fichant cites Terence as the reference (p. 108, note 24).
317. "Si Ie genre humain duroit asses long temps dans Ie present etat, et si tous les 100 ans, ou
     tous les millions d'ann~s, ou quelques autre intervalle encor plus grands, produisoient
     chacun pour Ie moins une nouvelle enontiation ou proposition; il s'ensuivroit necessairement, qu'enfin toutes les propositions enon~ables se trouveroient epuis~s; et ce qui
     viendroit par apres eroit une parfite repetition mot pour mot, de ce qui auroit dejlt dit, ou
     enonce autres fois. On ne pourroit faire aucun sermon, ni poesie ou Roman, ny livre qui
     n'auroist ctejlt este fait par un autre. Et ce moit vulgaire, nihil dici quod non dictum sit
     prius, seroit veritable It la lettre. Je trouve pourtant que l'hypothese d'un certain intervalle
     d'anneees produisant au moins une nouveaute, n'est pas certaine, ny meme raisonnable.
     II semble plustost, que la difficulte de produire des nouveautes croistroit tousjours; ainsi
     peut estre que Ie nombre des verites enon~ables bien que fini, ne s'epuiseroit jamais,
     comme dans les asymptotes l'intervalle entre la droite et la courbe de I'Hyperbole, ou
     de la Conchoide bien que fini n'est jamais epuise. Et memes si nous voulions feindre,
     que Ie genre humain tel que nous Ie connoissons presentement eftt subsiste depuis toute
     l'etemite, il ne s'ensuit point neeessairement que tout ce qui se peut dire ait deja este dit.
     Cependent il est vray que si Ie genre humain duroit assez long temps, presque tout ce
     qu'on pourroit dire ne seroit que redites. Et s'il y avoit souvent des nouveautes, on seroit
     enfin reduit It n'en pouvoir plus foumir. Et quoyque It cause des intervelles immenses
     des temps, qui auroient detruit toute la memoire des auteurs preeendens, ces redites
     paroistroient des nouveautes, cela ne laisse pas de choquer l'harmonie des choses, et
     de nous faire croire, que l' estat present du genre humain ne durera pas assez pour cela.
     Mais laissant lit des propositions, qui ne sont pas entirement demonstres, contentons
     nous d'avoir rencontre une espece d'horizon, qui borne la doctrine humaine, et d'avoir
     eleve nostre esprit It des reflexions qui Ie fond reeonnoistre en quelque fa~on ces bomes
     que la nature luy a donn~s" (Fichant, pp. 52-3).
318. The great platonic year was the name given to the period it took for the seven planets
     known to Plato, together with the fixed stars, to return to the same position relative to
     the earth and to themselves. This is described in the Timaeus, 39c--d.
319. "Posito satis durare humanum genus, tempus venire neeesse est ubi nihil dicatur, quod
     non dictum sit prius. Etsi certum non sit, tempus affuturum quo nihil dici possit, quod
     non dictum sit prius. Fieri enim potest ut quaedam etsi tota impenderetur aetemitas,
     nunqum dicantur, ea ergo semper supererunt dicibilia et non dum dicta. Nunquam dantur
     regressus perfecti, ut circulorum et ellipsium, nee fieri potest, ut unus locus aut unum
     tempus universi alteri perfeete sit simile sed tantum ad sensum.
                                                                                 Notes      193

          Posito autem aliquando nihil dici quod non dictum sit prius, oportet esse tempus
     quoque, quo redeant etiam eadem gesta, nihil que fiat quod non factum sit prius, nam
     quae geruntur materiam praebent serminibus.
          Imo necesse est esse periodos quasdam anno platonico similes, ita ut toto ali quo
     seculo exacte ad sensum eadem fiant quae ali quo alio seculo jam sunt facta; nam totius
     seculi res pro magno ali quo facto, et totius seculi Historia pro magno aliquo dicto haberi
     potest, quaelia et ipsa necesse est vel repeti vel exhauriri, id est post exhaustionem etiam
     repeti. Quae de diversis temporibus eorundem locorum seu earundem rerum, extendi
     etiam possunt ad diversa loca ejusdem temporis, ut eadem recurrant; imo in unaquaque
      mente tales intelligi possunt periodi, cum cogitet semper, etiam cum confuse et sine
     ani mae attentione.
          Et licet ponamus venire tempus, quo non supersit humanum genus; si tamen supersint
     intelligentes substantiae, quae non aliis quam nos cogitandi materiis, sive notionibus,
      utantur, idem de illis contingere oportet.
          Hinc porro, quia dignitati naturae consentaneum non est, ut priora tantum repetantur,
     consequens est, ut eatur ad intelligentias factas perfectiores, quae alias habeant notiones
      profundiores, et quae capaces sint majorum et magis compositarum veritatum; ita sciendo
      profici poterit infinitum.
          Itaque conveniens foret, si durarent humanae mentes, et platonicos quosdam annos
      haberent, eundem hominem reverti, non ut simpliciter in orbem redeat, sed ut velut
      spiraliter aut tortuose, inde progrediatur in aliquod majus. Est regredi ad prosiliendum
      magis, ut ad foss am.
          Fieri tamen etiam potest, ut progressus sit non spiralis aut aliter regressivus; qualis
     cycloidum secundararium; sed directus, qualis in cycloide primaria. Et fortasse quaedam
      creaturae platonicas habent periodos, aliae secus.
          In periodicis foret non tantum animae immortalitas, sed et aliquid corporis resurrectioni aequipollens, si non ipsa sit. Imo illud video periodos platonicas evitare non posse,
      saltern in notionibus quae manere debent seu quae sunt distinctae, ubi non detur materiae
      novitas, sed formae seu combinationis quae terminatur. Et revera confusae notiones si
     quis intelligeret resolvuntur in distinctas; cum ergo etiam mentes quae eunt ad majorem
      perfectionem tantum majores faciunt propositiones, quae ex minoribus componuntur,
     erunt acta earum composita ex majore tantum combinatione anteriorum actarum, atque
     ado progressione spirali seu anno platonic cum augmento, ita ut credi possit redire saepe
     eosdem ad telam persequendam... " (Fichant, pp. 59--60).
320. " ... Caeterum vel ex his judicari potest genus humanum semper in hoc statu non esse
     mansurum; quia divinae Harrnoniae consentaneum non est eadem semper chorda oberrare. Credendumque est vel ex naturalibus congruentiae rationibus res vel paulatim, vel
     etiam aliquando per saltus in melius proficere debere. Quanquam enim subinde in pejus
     ire videantur; hoc ad eum modum fieri putandum est, quo interdum recedimus ut majore
     impetu prosiliamus.
          Denique etiamsi non semper duraturum sit quale nunc est genus humanum; modo
     tamen semper ponamus existere mentes veritatem cognoscentes et indagantes; sequitur
     ali quando mentes eo perventuras, ut veritates a sensuum testimonio independentes seu
     Theoremata purae scientiae, quae scilicet exacte per rationes demonstrari possunt, quae
     jam inventa sunt, magnitudinem (verbi gratia paginae si scribantur) non excedentia; et
     multo magis breves sententias quae verbis scribi possunt; redire necesse sit.
          Ita nova theoremata invenienda oporteret crescere magnitudine in infinitum, quemadmodum videmus quasdam esse propositi ones Geometricas satis longas, et tamen
     pulchras.
          Hoc si fieret, necesse foret mentes etiam quae nondum satis capaces essent, fieri capaciores, ut tam magna theoremata capere et excogitare possent, qualibus etiam opus foret
     ad cognoscendam penitus naturam, veritates physicas revocando ad Mathematicas, v.g.
      ad cognoscendam machinam animalis, ad praevidendum quaedam futura contingentia
      certo verisimilitudinis gradu, atque adeo etiam ad mira quaedam in natura praestandum,
      quae nunc suprant humanum captum...
           Et quaevis mens horizontem praesentis suae circa scientias capacitatis habet, nullam
      futurae" (Ibid, pp. 75-6).
 321 Ibid., p. 173.
322. Petersen was born in Lubeck. He studied in Giessen, Rostock, Leipzig, Wittenberg, and
      Jena. He met Philipp Jacob Spener, one of the founders of the Pietist movement, in
      1675. In 1680 he married Johanna Eleonore von und zu Merlau. With her he embraced
      millenarianism, which led Lutheran officials in Celle to remove him from his position in
      Luneburg as superintendent of Churches. After reading the work of the English mystic
      and follower of Boehme, Jane Leade (1623-1704), both Petersen and his wife accepted
      the doctrine of apocatastasis, or universal salvation, both publishing books in support
      of it.
323. Fichant is the first to have published this manuscript (LBr 720, f. 2v): "Ego qui saepe
      cogitare soleo, quomodo fieri queat ut dotes magnorum hominum maxime in communi a
      commoda proficiant,vidi a Te posse profiscisci, quod saepe optavi, justum opus rerum
      coelestium heroico carmine comprehensum. Theologia enim sublimior etiam in prosa
      splendet, qui si induat virgilianam majestatem, quam tu unus et omnium optime circumdare posses. Materia tanti operis: primum Deus in abdito aetemitatis sibi perpetuo
      sufficiens, tum Cosmogonia, mox Oeconomia providentiae in gubernatione rerum; sed
      altera pars operis de futuris, sive ad corpora sive ad animas pertineant et ad hunc vel
     alium, ubi de purification animarum et restitutione rerum, vel potius amplification et exaltatione per gradus. Novissimam nec infimam partem dari optem magnitudini coelestis
     regni et ut sic dicam Aulae divina, ibi admiranda Angelicarum virtutum pingenda essent
     vivis coloribus et beatarum animarum celebranda felicitas, quibus non noster tantum
     sub pedibus orbis sed innumerabiles mundi paterent, et variis in omne aevum spectaculis divinae sapientiae et bonitatis, incederent magis magisque amorem et venerationem
     supremae Mentis. Hic castus elegantissimarum fictionum locus esset; etsi nihil a nobis
     tam pulchrum fingi possit, quod non veri tate superetur. Praeter Te autem, a quo tale quid
     sperari posset, neminem novi, cui et divinarum rerum recessus interiores patent, et vim
     eloquendi entheam" (Fichant, pp. 25-6).
 324 " ... L'auteur ajoute que quelques-uns ont encore soutenu cette doctrine, surtout au temps
     de la Reforme. La Comtesse anglaise, dans les Opuscula philos. quibus continentur
     principia philosophiae antiquissimae et recentissimae, 1690 (Opuscules philosophiques,
     ou sont compris les principes de la philosophie la plus ancienne comme de la plus
     r&:ente), ecrit: "Le Christ a sanctifie dans la nature de l'homme la nature de toutes
     les creatures ... afin de restaurer les creatures de la corruption." (Cette Dame etait une
     Comtesse de Connaway, et soeur du Chancelier Henneage Finch, comme on se souvient
     l'avoir entendu du sieur Helmont...
          M. Fran~ois Mercure van Helmont a voulu soutenir de diverses fa~ons dans ses
     Cogitata in Genesim (Pensees sur la Gen~se), et ailleurs aussi, la Restitution et Ie prog~s
     vers Ie mieux; mais il consid~re que l'etat ordinaire des limes est une metempsycose; il
     demeure toujours un nombre determine d'limes humaines (et de chaque espece); eUes
     seraient amenees par les revolutions des corps II des corps toujours sup6rieurs et toutes
     ensemble glorifiees en memes temps dans leur chef, Ie Christ; il soutient bien plus que Ie
     Christ est lui-meme une metempsycose d' Adam, en qui toutes les autre limes humaines
     ont preexiste et doivent de nouveaux parvenir ilia perfection avec lui et en lui. Suivent
     d'autres idees aussi extraordinarires qui lui sont venues sa vie durant (Ibid., p. 97).
325. See for example: Johann Wilhelm Petersen, Das Geheimniss der Erst-Gebohren ailer
     Creaturen von Christo Jesu dem Gott-Menschen (Frankfurt, 1711), pp. 23-29,41-44,
     187,190--195; idem, MVUT'l7PLOIl Ct1l'OK(XTaU7'Cl:UfWC; 1l'Cl:IIP7'WIl das ist, Das GeheimNotes      195
      nis der Widerbringung aller Dinge ... (Pamphilia = Offenbach, 1700-1), I, pp. 85-86,
       where he quotes pages of Lady Conway's book.
326. "Leibniz a-toil pour autant fait sienne la doctrine de la "salvation universelle? La question
       deborde assurement I'interpretation de l'opuscule que nous editions; pourtant sa teneur
       autant que son titre am~nent ~ la poser, au moins aux marges de notre interpretation"
       (Fichant, p. 200).
327. H. Vital, "Concerning the Revolution of Souls," KD I, 2: 417: "pauci sunt homines, qui
       evitare queant, ne revolvantur in animal quoddam, vel bestiam, vel avem, vel inanimatum
       quoddam, vel vegetabile aliquod; & sic similiter in aliquam mundi creaturam. Qua ratione
       quilibet poenam suam sustinere cogitur, quoad corpus & quoad Psychem: quoniam in
       statum corporeum deducendus est, ut sentire queat dolores illos commeritos. Et omnia
       quidem pro natura peccatorum."
 328. See my articles in the bibliography.
 329. A new edition and translation of this extremely interesting work is scheduled for publication by Cambridge University Press in 1985. See Coudert & Corse, eds., The Principles
       of the most Ancient and Modem Philosophy... by Anne Conway.
 330. Paradoxial Discourses, pp. 106-7.
 331. Ibid. pp. 136-7.
 332. F. M. van Helmont, Two Hundred Queries, p. 115.
 333. Coudert, Alchemy.
 334. Memoirs, fols. Cr(-D): "The Anatomy which I have made of pain, that pains are good,
       being a fire trans mutative and altering for the better and improving together with the
      joys following upon the said pain, made that when I was carried from Germany to come
       in the inquisition, where I continued ten months, when they told me that they would
       bum me and that they would put me to the Rack, I asked them whether I should have no
      justice done me, and they tolt! me, no. I only said that if it were so I was happier than
       severall great Princes who are racked as bad and cannot see their tormentors, whereas I
       should have the advantage as to see him. And besides, whatsoever punishment happens
       to a man that is innocent, it doth him much good. And as to burning, I considered and
       balanced the thing on both sides whether it were better to be burnt, or no. I after all ...
       found more for than against burning, that is my arguments concluded it rather better to
      be burnt if it should come to that."
335. In this monograph I have used the new translation of Lady Conway's work by Coudert
      & Corse, but because it has not yet been published I refer the reader to the corresponding
      pages in the Loptson edition. Principles, p. 193.
336. Ibid., p. 192.
337. Two Hundred Queries, pp. 131-2.
338. KD II, 2: 248: "nempe omnes mentes & spiritus & psychae nulla excepta comprehensae
      fuerint in Adamo protoplaste cum conderetur; its ut quaedam animae pertinerent ad
      caput Adami; quaedam ad oculos ejus; quaedam ad ipsius nasum, & sic porro ad omnia
      ejus membra, ~ quibus quasi dependebant."
339. (26 May 1706). G III: 306: " ... M. Mercurius van Helmont croyait que l'dme de Jesus
      estoit celIe d' Adam, et que I' Adam nouveau reparant ce que Ie premier avait gate, c'etoit
      Ie meme personnage qui satisfaisait ~ son ancienne dette. Je crois qu'on fait bien de
      s'epargner la peine de refuter de telles pensees."
340. Grua, La Justice humaine selon Leibniz, p. 213.
341. Genesis [English version], pp. 58-9; Latin edition, pp. 29-30.
342. Genesis [Latin version], p. 4: Producta autem ab Aelohim ex seminibus, cum antea in
      ipso essent, jam per se subsistunt, sibi relicta, & habent vim activam atque spontaneam, ut
      possint progredi, vel etiam regredi, seu labi, quemadmodum & Mundus totus in Adamo
      est lapsus.
343. Theodicy, par. 91, pp. 172-3.
344. Becco, "Leibniz et Fran~is-Mercure van Helmont," p. 137: "C'est ici que la plus franche
     cassure intervient entre van Helmont et Leibniz, qui ne peut que sourir lila doctrine de
     la revolution des ames ... "
345. KD I, 2: 310-11: "Sed absurda & incongrua ex vulgari opinione, quod nempe materia
     a Deo creata sit ex nihilo profluentia, haec essent: 1. quod ab Ente summe perfecto,
     summe intelligente, summe libero, motum per se habente in summo gradu, summe
     penetrante, summe immutabili, summe positivo, summe vivo, &, produci immediate
     diceretur ens summe imperfectum; omni scientia, intellectu, & cognitione in summo
     gradu carens; summe necessarium, coactum, & ad leges motus passivi in summo gradu
     obligatum, adeoque omni omninb libertate & volitione destitutum; motu per se in extremis gradibus carens, sed non nisi motibus alienis & impresis subjectum, adeoque per se
     in summo gradu quiescens & immoblile: Omni penetratione tam activa, quam passiva
     inter se carens; summe mutabile; summe privativum omnique beatitudine & bonorum
     realium positione orbatum; adeoque summe mortuum & torpidum: & per consequens
     nihil omninb eorum habens, quae in causa continentur; unde etiam natura Deo plane
     contraria II pluribus dicta est: Cum tamen causa efficiens sicut non producere potest
     aliquid sibi plane simile, ita nec aliqid plane dissimile. 2. Et hoc tamen subjetum tam
     vile atque inane, quod minimam partem universi occupare meritb II nobis dicitur, in
     eadem hypothesi vulgari, statuitur Deo c~xtensum, imb c~xistens, atque coordinatum,
     adeoque in tantam extollitur existimationem, ut in tota Philosophia gentili omnis doctrina hoc solo subjecto exhauriatur, quae etiam mensura statuitur theorematum de Spiritu
     & Deo; (quod II posteriori demonstrare appellant,) unde maledictus ille materialismus
     & per consequens Atheismus. 3. Sicut contradictionem implicant, non esse & esse; ita
     contradictionis hujus consequens est Ex non esse, esse, si accurat e & ad leges characterum causalium loquendum est. 4. Eodem modo Deus dici deberet creasse mortem,
     peccatum, umbram, monstra, malum, &, quae privationes sunt, ut materia privatio est
     naturae spiritualis, quippe cujus definitionem ne unicus quidem terminus positivus jure
     meritb ingredi debet; quia nec discerpibilitas Eidem competit in abstracto & in atomo
     consideratae. 5. Creatio materiae ex nihilo Sapientiae Dei e diametro repugnat; quippe
     quae tali in casu cum, quod optimum fuisset, potuisset omnem creaturam facere spiritum,
     aliquam tamen & tantundem fecisset non spiritum, & non optimum. 6. Contra Bonitatem
     ejus est, quia creasset aliquid citra communicationem plerorumque bonorum suorum.
     1mb 8. ab uno extrema statueretur processus dari ad alterum immediatus. Unde 9. absurdum esset ad evitandas absurditates incertas & non necessarib ex hypothesi fluentes,
     absurditates admittere alias plures, naturae animae, & regni Messiani insigniter nocivas,
     mentemque barathris materialibus caenosis sic immergentes, ut prae naturae spiritualis
     obliteratione tandem quasi plane materialescat, quod Deus avertat!"
346. LI: 90.
347. L II: 610.
348. Garber & Askiew, eds., Section 31, p. 33.
349. Theodicy, par. 153, p. 219.
350. Grua I: 94.
351. Grua I: 94, note 47.
352. Ibid. p. 94: "De Progressu infinitum [Grua thinks this was written sometime between
     1694-1696]: Si omnia inter ascendendum descendant rursus, nec recta progrediantur,
     quaeritur qua ratione in infinito progressus definiatur, sitne ascensus an descensus an
     neutrum. Si ascendere rem dicamus, dicet alius rursus descendere post longas periodos,
     etsi aliquando iterum ascendat. Dico igitur verum esse ascensum, si assumi nunc possit
     puctum infra quod non amplius descenderetur, et post aliquod tempus utcunque longum
     rursus perveniretur ad punctum altius infra quod non amplius descenderetur. Atque ita
     in infinitum. Idemque contra est de descensu. Quod si nullum sit punctum, de quo dici
                                                                                  Notes      197
     possit nunc vel aliquando: hue non redibitur. revolutio erit in qua nec ascensus nec
     descensus."
353. Grua I: 95: "An Mundus Perfectione Crescat [1694--1696]
        Quaeritur an totus mundus perfectione crescat aut descrecat. An vero eandem semper perfectionem servet, quod potius puto, tametsi diversae partes perfectionem inter
     se varie permutent, ut invicem transferatur. Si eadem manet mundi perfectio, non possunt quaedam substantiae perfectione perpetuo crescere, qui alia perfectione perpetuo
     descrescant. Substantia perfectione crescens aut continue crescit, aut crescit rursusque
     decrescit, sed ita ut tamen plus crevisse quam decrevisse deprehendatur. Si qua substantia
     sive directe sive interpositis regressibus progreditur perfectione in finitum, necesse est ut
     nunc assignari possit gradus perfectione maximus infra quem in posterum nunquam sit
     descensura, et aliquo tempore elapso rursus alius major priore. Nec tamen ideo necesse
     est, ut promoveatur semper summus gradus ascensionis. Quo casu necesse est infimum
     gradum ascensionis intra datum tempus, etsi semper promoveatur, tamen certum limitem attingere, vel tandem incidere in summum ascensionis, quo casu tunc substantia in
     aetemum eundem perfectionis gradum servaret. Si infimus gradus aliquando cesset promoveri, vel saltern limitem habeat, ultra quem non ascendat, at summus gradus ascensus
     promoveatur semper, progressus est in infinitum perfectionis, sed is tum perfectus est
     cum infimus descensus itidem nullum limitem habeat, supraque non sit ascensum.
        Sed si substantia in infinitum descendat infra gradum quemvis, et ascendat etiam infra
     gradum quemvis, videbitur tamen ascendere si magis ascendat quam descendit.
        An dicemus mundum necessario crescere virtute, quia animae omnibus praeteritis
     afficuntur, neque enim, ut alibi demonstravimus, ulla datur apud animas perfectat oblivio,
     etsi distinctum non recordemus, totum tamen quod nunc percipimus ex partibus consistit,
     in quas ingrediuntur omnes actiones praecendentes. An igitur animae semper debent
     evehi per periodos ad expressiores cogitationes. Si fieri non potest ut detur perfectio
     quae non augeri queat, sequitur perfectionem universi semper augeri; ita enim perfectius
     est quam si non augeatur. [Voluptas] beatitudo non consistit in summo quodam gradu,
     sed in perpetuo gaudiorum incremento. Summum illud Ens perfectione non augetur,
     quia est extra tempora et mutationes, et praesenti a futuraque eaque complectitur." Grua
     places brackets around words or phrases deleted by Leibniz.
354. As Grua points out these refer to neshamah, ruah, nefesh, which are described in Seder
     Olam, para. 41, which Leibniz had read.
355. Insertion.
356. The worlds of creationis, formationis, factionis, are described in both the Zohar and the
     Seder Olam.
357. Grua indicates deletions with square brackets.
358. Grua's transcription is only a resume ofthe full text (LBr 67, fols. 52-53). De Homine.
     Beatitudine. Deo. Christo [1694--1696]
       1) In Homine est spiritus, anima et corpus: seu Mens, Ratio, carD vel sensus. Mens
           superiora considerat, Ratio aequalia, sensus interiora. Mundi tres, divinus, Angelicus <spiritualis>, sensibilis. Mundus superior eminenter continet inferiora. Inferior
           est umbra superioris [Angelos omnem mundum inferiorem in sese habet spiritualiter, ut exhibere etiam possit si velit.] Deus continet omnia in uno, et ad hoc unum
           omnia tendunt, hoc est summum omnium bonun. Bonum est intemam et extemum,
           illud est verum, hoc est falsi nominis bonum. Intemum profluit ex nobis, extemum
           <generali acceptione> fortuna diei potest, nec in potestate est.
       2) Bona particularia extema sunt fortunae (corporis, ingenii), aeque vel a natura, vel
           studio, vel casu acquiruntur; possunt tamen omnia certo sensu fortuita diei, et
           veniunt a caelo (id est universali corporum cursu) et ut dantur a casu, sic ab eo
           auferuntur.

       3) Homo terrenus est ex hoc mundo seu limo; unde pendet a caelo seu fortuna; homines
           dum student fortunae bonis, servos se faciunt astrorum <ut bruta>. Fortuna servos
           <motu suo> exercet, ut manipuli triturando torquentur. Sed pars hominis immortalis debet fato astrali seu corporis impressionibus dominari. Fato sapientia major
           (qui parten immortalem sui cogitant, et angelos agnoscunt fratres, et Deum patrem
           et corpus servum). Nam parts nostri melior ut angelica ad imaginem Dei creata est.
           Qui his contemplandis sese exercent, et aetema versant, animo a sensibus abducto,
           illi corporeo contagio eximuntur, et astris dominantur. sub pedibusque vident nubes
           et sidera coeli.
       4) Tristesse et joie indument liees a la fortune.
        5) Elle prete seulement ses dons; tort d'y tenir.
        6) Tous cherchent Ie bien supeme, diversement.
        7) Richesses, bien trompeur ou passager, et non honorable.
       8) Honneur fortuit et leurre.
        9) Gloire posthume limitee.
      10) Plaisirs, beaute, passagers. Pas de bonheur sur terre.
      II) Les biens terrestres se COft4;Urrencent. Seul Dieu reunit tous les biens.
      12) Meme reunis, ils ne seraient que I'ombre des vrais biens.
      13) Vrai bonheur en Dieu, sagesse, justice, felicite essentiellement.
      14) Dieu unite. Adherant aDieu, nous devenons un "teste primogenito" (Jo. 17).
      15) Les hommes deviennent heureux "adeptione divinitatis", fils de Dieu par Ie Christ.
      16) La fin des choses, c'est Ie bien. Nous en ecartant, nous renions notre etre.
      17) Tout obeit aDieu. Le mal n' est rien, vient de la privation dans les creatures.
      18) "Mala sunt quatenus non omnia attingunt summum bonum." Cependant Ie mal
           meme sert aux bons.
      19) Mal faire est impuissance. "Mali serviunt bonis, ut bestiae hominibus".
      20) Anmelioration par Ie chlitiment.
      21) Impunite n'est pas chance mais maladie. Pitie pour les mechants.
      22) Tout evenement, providentiel, est bon aux bons.
      23) "Ascensus a sensibilibus ad intellectualia, a creaturis in Deum... Deus produxit
           angelos dicendo fiat lux. Ex hac luce astra (vel potius formae, archaei, ideae,
           astrales virtutes) «+ vel ut magis philosophice dicam, vires actrices primariae
           universi +» ex his corpora.
      24) "Deus maximum infinitate, indivisibilitate minimum ... Christus centrum vitae
           aetemae...
      25) Lucifer a cherche son bonheur en soi. C'est une loi de la nature qui condamne
           cette "philautia" comme idoHitrie. "Ad se converti est ad nihilum tendere. De his
           vide Theologiam Germanicam, et Kempisium, et Taulerum. Denique Deus omnibus
           lucet, ut sol, sed occaecati a seipsis eum non vident".
      26) Mal possibile par aveuglement. "Sed Dei non est violare ordinem rerum supremum".
      27) "Theologia vera in cognitione Adami et Christi, nostri et Dei. D' Adam, se toumer
           ver soi <edere camem et sanguinem Adae>. Du Christ, s'abandonnera aDieu
           <edere camem et sanguinem filii Dei>.
     "Adam extemus non nocet, sed intemus; nec Christus extemus prodest, sed intemus;
     ergo qui Christum fide induit, is in se habet vitam, lucem, Deum, summum bonum (+
     Omnia ad unum referre, seu ad Deum, est harmoniam rerum concipere.+) ... In tenebris
     creaturarum lucet divina lux."
359. See, for example, LH IV, 3, 8, 3-4, 9-10.; LH 1,5,2, 15-18.
360. G VII: 544--6 (Hanover 9 May 1697): "Madame. C'est par un ordre de Madame
     I'Electrice de Bronsvic que j'ose la liberte d'envoyer ce paquet de livres a Vostre serenite Electorale. Monsieur Helmont avant que de partir d'icy, me chargea de procurer une
     nouvelle impression de la version Allemand fort bien faite du livre fameux de Boetius,
                                                                                      Notes      199

     consul Romain dans Ie temps que les Goths estoient maistres de Rome. Quoyque ce
     livre intitule: Consolation de Ill. phi}osophie (dont les exemplaires seront rendus avec
     cette lettre), ait eu, de tout temps, l'approbation generale des plus habiles, neantmoins
     Monsieur Helmont a ceQ avec raison qu'il seroit encor mieux receu h present dans la
     monde, s' il avoit celIe de deux grandes Electrices dont I' esprit n' est pas moins eleve que
     la qualite, et h qui il semble appartenir, par un don singulier du ciel, de juger sainement
     de ces matieres sublimes qui passent la capacite des ames vulgaires et profanes. Monsieur Helmont affectionne particulierement ce livre, parce qu'il y croist remarquer les
     traces des senti mens Pytbagoriques. Mais cela mis h part, il faut avouer que l'auteur dit
     des choses tres belles et tres sensees sur l'ordre de l'univers. Car h voir les succes des
      mauvais, les malheurs des bons, la brievete et les maux ordinaires de la vie humaine,
     et mille desordres apparens qui s'offrent h nos yeux, il semble que tout va par hazard.
      Mais ceux qui examinent l'interieur des choses, y trouvent tout si bien regIe, qu'ils ne
      s~auroient douter que l'univers ne soit gouveme par une souveraine intelligence, dans
      un ordre si parfait que, si on I' entendoit en detail, on ne croiroit pas seulement, mais
     on verroit meme que rien ne se peut souhaitter de mieux. De sorte que les desordres
      apparens ne sont que comme certains accords dans la musique qui paroissent mauvais,
     quant on les entend seuls, mais qu'un habile compositeur laisse entrer dans sa piece,
      parce qu'en les joigant avec d'autres accords, ils en relevent Ie goust, et rendent toute
     l'harmonie plus belle. Et comme ce que nous voyons maintenant n'est qu'une tres petite
      portion de l'univers infini, et que nostre vie present n'est qu'une petite parcelle de ce qui
      nous doit arriver, on ne doit point s'estonner si toute la beaute des choses ne s'y decovre
      pas d'abord; mais nous y entrerons de plus en plus, et c'est pour cela mesme qu'il est
      necessaire que nous changions de situation. C'est h peu pres comme les mouvemens
     des astres paroissent irreguliers h ceux qui ne les regardent que durant peu d'annees,
     cependant la suite des siecles a fait connoistre qu'il n'y a rien de si beau ny de si regIe.
     C'est pourquoy Ie vulgaire ne con~oit pas ces choses, il ne s'eleve point h l'ordre general, il ne con~oit pas ces choses, il ne s'eleve point h l'ordre general, il ne connoist
      pas mesmes sa propre religion et n'ayant que de fausees idees de la divinite, il !lotte
     entre la superstition et Ie libertinage tousjours mal fonde, soit qu'il craigne mal ou qu'il
     craigne rien. Mais h quoy bon de parler d'avantage de ces choses que Bo~tius explique
     bien mieux, et que votre esprit sublime con~oit encor mieux que B~tius ne s~auroit
     dire. J'ay ceQ seulement qu'il estoit h propros que je donnasse quelque idee du live que
     j'envoye, estant avec une devotion ardente ... "
361. L II: 794-95.
362. Ibid.
363. Ibid.: 796-7.
364. Leibniz uses the word "cultus." Loemker translates this as "culture." In their translation
     Garber and Askiew translate this as "cultivation."
365. L II: 797-8. Leibniz anticipated some of these ideas in virtually the same words in a letter
     to Sophie dated 4 November 1696 (LBr 389, f. 66). This provides additional evidence
     that these speculations were occasioned by van Helmont's theories.
366. Walker, The Decline of Hell.
367. Theodicy, par. 137, p. 137.
368. "Interdum auditus est dicere, quemlibet in sua fide salvari posse secundum singulare
     ipsius lumen et lumen conscientiae" ("Information de Helmontio," May/June 1662,
     Archvio Segreto Vaticano, Archivio dells Nunziatura di Colonia 81).
369. Ibid., par. 95 & 98, pp. 175,177.
370. Frankel, "Causation, Harmony, and Analogy," p. 58.
371. "La philosophie de Leibniz est, dans Ie fond, un monisme de I' esprit ou, malgre les efforts
     de l'auteur, la realite de la matiere et ses fontieres avec l'esprit sont fuyantes et fragiles ...
     Leibniz aurait desiree que la substance unique du pantheisme parot brisee par sa doctrine
      en une infinite d'6clats origineux: il ne parvient pas, cependant, it dissiper l'equivoque
      qu'implique son m6cansime metaphysique. Dieu est la realite infinie. En passant de
      l'essence it l'existence (selon leur perfection ou quantite d'essence), les substances
      empruntent leur realite it celIe de Dieu. Elles ne sont que parce qu'elles sont de Dieu.
      Leibniz les fait sortir hors de Dieu, mais ne peut emp&her qu'en tant qu'existences,
      elles ne demeurent en Dieu. La distinction entre les creatures et Ie createur n'est qu'un
      aspect de l'univers monadique. Vues sous l'angle de leur realite (et par consequent) de
      leur activite propre, de leur puissance), les creatures ne sont pas distinctes du createur.
      Deus odest orbi. C'est en ce sense que dans la pensee de Leibniz demeurent des traces
      importantes d'immanentisme. La substance est une, bien qu'eparpillee en une infinite
      de substances. Chacune d'elles est (quatenus) la substance, et celle-ci est en chacune
      d'elles.
         De ce point de vue, l'univers de Leibniz est encore une phusis antique, refondue par Ie
      genie d'un homme de la Renaissance, qui la ¢netre d'Harmonie, et d'un moderne, grand
      mathematicien, qui integre en elle use notion originale d'infini" (Friedmann, Leibniz et
      Spinoza, p. 213).
372. Frankel, "Causation, Harmony, and Analogy," p. 64.
373. Quoted in Ibid., p. 61 [G IV: 170]
374. NE ii, xxi; quoted in Ibid.
375. Garber & Askiew, eds., p. 75.
376. Ibid.
377. Wiener, Leibniz Selections, pp. 494-5; Foucher de Careil, Refutations, p. 60.
378. Frankel, "Causation, Harmony, and Analogy," p. 65.
379. Ibid., p. 64. Letter to Thomasius, AriI20/30, 1669 [G IV: 169].
380. Monadology 48.
381. "On a General Principle, Useful for the Explanation of Laws of Nature" (Wiener, Selections, pp. 69-70).
382. "A study of Leibniz' mature reflections on the concepts central to his system, substance,
     force, space, and time, reveals a pervasive habit of thought, which is to distinguish
     different levels of reality, each linked to the one underlying it by the relation of expression.
     Monads, as pure, relationless essences, constitute the fundamental level, the "really real,"
     but there are further levels, and monads appear differently at each level.
         When monads are considered as objects of God's will as well as of his- intellect, that
     is, when they become possible existents, their intrinsic nature is expressed extrinsically
     as a "point de vue" or characteristic perspective. Thus they are brought into relation to
     each other according to a divine logic which constitutes an order of two dimensions.
     For some perspectives logically tolerate each other, though they are not identical, and so
     form an order of compossibles, side by side so to speak. And other perspectives logically
     exclude each other, and so form an order of exclusion, of priority and posteriority. The
     original array of distinct monads is then expressed in a logical order of perspectives with
     the two dimensions of compossibility and exclusion.
         This level is in tum the precondition for the next, where the two dimensions of logical
     order are expressed as the mathematical orders of space and time, extension and duration.
     Here, perspective is expressed as mere position; the infinitely rich complexity of each
     monad is not retained in this abstraction, only its bare claim to a position different from
     that of every other monad. Thus the heterogeneity and discreteness which existed at
     earlier levels disappears, leaving only the homogeneous continua of space and time.
         Finally, space and time constitute a level anterior to actual concrete existents in
     space and time. Now it should be clear why Leibniz thought that the exact sciences
     of mathematics and physics can yield true knowledge. The imaginative constructions
     of mathematics, and the appearances of the external world which come to us through
     the senses cannot provide us with knowledge of the absolute simples, the monads,
                                                                                Notes 201
     which are their ground; such knowledge is reserved for God. However, the human
     knower can hope to have objectiye scientific knowledge, since mathematics and sensible
     appearances express a relational structure which is necessary and a priori. The doctrine
     of expression posits that this invariant relational structure is exhibited by all levels of
     reality; indeed, it is what allows these levels to appear. Thus Leibniz calls the subject
     matter of mathematics and physics phenomena bene fundata; divine logic guarantees
     an intelligible connection between phenomena and things as they really are" (Grosholz,
     "Leibniz' Formalist Realism," p. 38) ..
383. J.B. van Helmont, Oriatrike, p. 536.
384. Pagel, Joan Baptistq van Helmont, pp. 72-3.
385. Vickers, "Analogy and Identity," p. 117.
386. Pagel, Joan Baptista van Helmont, p. 36.
387. Ibid., pp. 85ff.
388. Des vortrejJlichen Engelliinders Thomae Brown, der Artzney Dr. Pseudodoxia Epidemica... durch Christian Peganium, in Teutsch Rautner genannt...Frankfurt und Leipzig,
      1680. Peganius and Rautner were von Rosenroth's pseUdonyms.
389. Coudert, ''Theories of a Natural Language."
390. AK VI, 1: 283.
391. Scholem suggests Bacharach is referring to the making of the golem ("Golem," Encyclopaedia Judaica).
392. KD II, 2: 458-9: "Quod si igitur homo justus est atque pius, studetque in lege, & precatur
     cum attentione; ex illis vocibus, quae prodeunt ab ore ejus, creantur Angeli & Spiritus
     Sancti, qui semper durant atque persistunt."
393. " ... keine andere Sprache auf der Welt mit ihr so genau iibereinkomme als diese ...
     (Kurtzer Entwurff, preface, 13).
394. "Und demnach auch nur etliche und bey weitem nicht alle inwendige beschaffenheiten
     mit eigentlichen zeichen k6nnen zu verstehen geben. Hernach muste Adam gespUret
     haben/daB sein verstand in dem wercke des verstehens in das jenige ding verwandelt
     und gleichsam verselbstet wiirdeldamit er umgienge; und daB demnach alle liuBerliche
     dinge in ihm k6nte zu einer innerlichen beschaffenheit werden... Weil nun aus aller
     Thiereldie er vor sich saheleigentlicher Natur jedesmal so zu sagen ein theil seines
     inwendigen wesens ward/und seine worte solches inwendige so genau konten abbilden;
     so muB folgen/daB auch seine Sprachelwelche Hebreisch war/die eigentliche Natur gleich
     wie aller Thierelalso aller andern dinge aufs allergenaueste konnen abbilden. Wo findet
     man nun eine einige Sprachelvon welcher man dergleichen mit so herzlicher gewissheit
     beweisen k6nteT (Ibid., pp. 14-15).
395. Thoughts on Genesis [English], pp. 13-15; Latin edition, pp. 4-5.
396. Ibid., p. 134; Latin edition, p. 79.
397. Ibid., p. 91; Latin edition, p. 49.
398. Ibid., pp. 34-5; Latin edition, p. 16.
399. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic, pp. 64-72.
400. Yates, The Art of Memory, ch. 8.
401. Ibid., ch. 7; see also her essays on Lull in Lull & Bruno.
402. "On a General Principle, Useful for the Explanation of Laws of Nature" (1687), quoted
     in Wiener, Selections, p. 69.
403. "Reply to the Thoughts on the system of Preestablished Haromong contained in the
     Second Edition of Mr. Bayle's Critical Dictionary, Article Rorarius" (1702), L II: 939.
404. L II: 903.
405. Writing to Thomas Burnett (17/27 July 1696) Leibniz says: " ... J'ay fait rapport de la
     vostre [lettre] a Madame l'Electrice en presence de Mr. van Helmont, qui nous dit qu'il
     connoissoit Mr. Lock, et temoignoit d'en faire becaucoup de cas, comme de raison. Ce
     que je vous ay envoye de mes Reflexions sur 1'important livre de M. Lock est entierement
      avostre disposition, et vous Ie pouves communiquer aqui bon vous semble; et s' il tombe
      entre ses mains, ou celles de ses amis, tant mieux; car cela luy donnera occasion de nous
     instruire et d'eclaireir la matiere" (G III: 180).
406. Aarsleff, "Schulenburg's Leibniz als Sprachforscher, with some Observations on Leibniz
      and the Study of Language, p. 127.
407. Boyle made this suggestion in his Free Inquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of
      Nature (1686).
408. L II: 813.
409. Ibid.: 815.
410. Vickers, Occult & Scientific Mentalities in the Renaissance, introduction, pp. 32ff.
411. Gombrich, "Icones Symbolicae.....
412. Fieino, Opera Omnia (Basle, 1576), p. 1768.
413. C. H. Josten, "A Translation of John Dee's Monas Hieroglyphica .....
414. "Und wenn wir die Schrifften des Alten Testaments ansehenlwas finden wir darinnen
      anders eine Goldgrube aller guten Ktinste und Wissenschafftenlund einen Schatzkastenldarinnen aIle Kleinodien der Philosophi, aIle Reichthilmer des Rechtenslund was
      das vornehmstelalle Schlitze der Gtlttlichen und allein seligmachenden Weisheit verborgen liegen? Ich will nicht gedenckenldaB daraus das einige Liecht aller Zeitrechnung hervorstraletidaB darinnen jederman ein voIlkommener Spiegel aller Tugenden
      und Laster vor Augen stehetlund die warhafftigen Regeln wohl zu regieren und klilglich
      hauszuhaltenlaus keinem Buche besser und grilndlicher zu lernen sind/also aus diesem.
      Weil weniger kan ich ausfuhrenlwas diese wunderbaren Bticher unter dem einfliltigen
      historischen Buchstaben vor herzliche Geheirnnisse beydes der Natur und der Sitten verstecket haltenlder geheimen Weissagungen zu geschweigen" (Kurtzer Entwurff, preface,
     p. 12).
415. Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz; Ishiquiro, Leibniz's Philosophy ofLogic and Language.
416. "Cabbala duplex, realis et literalis, haec est Gematria (haec transponit literas et syllabas
     faeitque ex dictione aliam dictionem aut alterius dictionis complutum). Notariaca quae ex
     singulis literis praesertim initialibus novas dictiones condit. Themura quae est quaedam
     stenographia et totius alphabeti commutatio" (Foucher de Careil, ed., Refutations, p. 6).
417. Weiner, Selections, p. xxi.
418. Ibid.
419. " ... einem ganz taubenlschwachsehenden und zitrenden Musicanten" (Kurtzer Entwurffe,
     p.7).
420. Rossi, Clavis, p. 219.
421. See What Real Progress has Metaphysics made in Germany since the Time of Leibniz
     and Wolff?, tr. T. Humphrey. New York: Abaris, 1983.
422. 12122 July 1695, quoted in Robinet, Malebranche et Leibniz, p. 319.
423. Wilson, Leibniz's Metaphysics, p. 115.
424. Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition; The Rosicrucian Enlightenment;
     Webster, The Great Instauration; Idel, The Kabbalah, p. 170 & passim; Coudert, "Henry
     More, the Kabbalah, and the Quakers."
425. The Conway Letters, p. 329.
426. Leibniz to Bourguet (March 1714), G III: 568: ..... il est bon d'etudier les decouvertes
     d'autruy d'une maniere qui nous decouvre la source des inventions, et qui nous les rende
     propres en quelque fa~on a nous memes. Et je voudrois que les Auteurs nous donassent
     I'Histoire de leur decouvertes, et les progres par lesquels ils y sont arrives. Quand ils ne
     Ie font point, il faut tacher de les deviner, pour mieux profiter de leur ouvrages."
                                       Bibliography

                                LEIBNIZ: ORIGINAL WORKS

Couturat, L., ed. Opuscules et fragments inedits de Leibniz (Paris, 1903), repro Hildesheim:
  Olms, 1966.
Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften, ed. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Samtliche Schriften
  und Briefe. Darmstadt und Berlin: Akademie-Vedag, 1923.
Dutens, L., ed. Opera Omnia, 6 vols. Geneva, 1768.
Fichant, M., ed. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: De l' Horizon de la Doctrine Humaine (1693);
  'A1tOK(l'CaO'ta<JL~ 1tUvtWV (La Restitution universe lie) (1715). Textes inedits, traduit et annote
  par M. Fichant. Paris: J. Vrin, 1991.
Foucher de Careil, A., ed. Leibniz: La Philosophie Juive et la Cabale. Paris: Auguste Durand,
  1861.
- Oeuvres de Leibniz. 7 vols. Paris, 1859-75.
- Refutation inedite de Spinoza par Leibniz. Paris: Librarie philosophique de Ladrange, 1854.
Garber, D. and R. Askiew, trs. and eds. G. W. Leibniz: Discourse on Metaphysics and Other
  Essays. Indianapolis and Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Co., 1991.
Gerhardt, c.I., ed. Die Philosophischen Schriften von G. W. Leibniz. 7 vols. (Berlin, 1875-90),
  repro Hildesheim: Olms, 1962.
Grua, G., ed. G.w. Leibniz: Textes inedits, 2 vols. Paris: Presse Universitaires de France, 1948.
Huggard, E.M., ed. Theodicy. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1952.
Klopp, 0., ed. Correspondenz von Leibniz mit der Prinzessin Sophie (1873), 2 vols. repro
  Hildesheim: Olms, 1973.
- Die Werke von Leibniz. 11 vols. Hannover, 1864-84.
Loemker, L., tr. and ed. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Philosophical Papers and Letters, 2 vols.
  Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1956.
Pertz, G .H., ed. "Tagebuch," in Geschichtliche Aufsatze und Gedichte Gottfried Withem Leibniz
  Gesammeltewerk. (Hannover, 1847), repro Hildesheim: Olms, 1966.
Weiner, P., ed. Leibniz: Selections. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951.

Manuscript Sources

Hanover, Niederslischsische Landesbibliothek, MSS LH; LBr. 389.
London, The British Library, Sloane MS 530.
Wolfenbilttel, Herzog August Bibliothek, Cod-Guelf, 30.4., Auftrags-Nr. 5519.

Other Works:

Abbreviations
JHI Journal o/the History o/Ideas
JHP Journal o/the History o/Philosophy
JWCI Journal o/the Warburg & Courtauld Institutes
MWS Midwest Studies in Philosophy
SL    Studia Leibnitiana
SLS Studia Leibnitiana Supplementa
SLSH Studia Leibnitiana Sonderheft

Aarsleff, H. "Leibniz on Locke and Language." American Philosophical Quarterly, Vol. I
  (1964), pp. 165-88.
- "Schulenburg's Leibniz als Sprach/orscher, with some Observations on Leibniz and the
  Study of Language." SL 7 (1975), pp. 122-134.
Adams, R.M. "Phenomenalism and Corporeal Substance in Leibniz." MWS 8 (1983), 217-58.
- "Leibniz's Theories of Contingency." In Leibniz: Critical and Interpretive Essays, pp. 24383. Edited by Hooker.
Agrippa, H.C. Three books o/Occult Philosophy, tr. J.E London, 1651.
Aiton, EJ. Leibniz: A Biography. Bristol: Adam Hilger, 1985.
Ashcraft, R., R. Kroll, and P. Zagorin, eds. Philosophy, Science, and Religion in England
  (1640-1700). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Barber, W.H. Leibniz in France. From Arnauld to Voltaire: A Study in French Reactions to
  Leibnizianism, 1670-1760. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1955.
Baruzi, J. "Leibniz. Avec textes inedits." in La Pensee Chretienne. Paris, 1909.
- Leibniz et I' organisation religieuse de la terre. Paris: Alcan, 1907.
- "Trois Dialogues mystiques inedits de Leibniz." Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale 13
  (1905), 15-38.
Becco, A. "Aux sources de la monade: Paleographie et lexicographie leibniziennes." Etudes
  Philosophiques 3 (1975),279-94.
- Du simple selon G.w' Leibniz, etude comparative critique des proprietes de la substance,
  appuyee sur l'operation informatique MONADO 74. Paris: Vrin, 1975.
- "Leibniz et EM. van Helmont: Bagatelle pour des monades." SLSH 7 (1978), 119-42.
Brehier, M. Histoire de la Philosophie. Paris, 1929.
Belaval, Y. Leibniz Critique de Descartes. Paris: Gallimard, 1960.
Benz, E. "La Kabbale Chretienne en Allemagne du xvi au xviii siecle." In Kabbalistes
  Chretiens: Cahiers d' Hermetisme. Edited by Faivre and Tristan. Paris: Editions Albin
  Michel, 1979.
Berg, J. van den and E. van der Wall, eds. Jewish-Christian Relations in the Seventeenth
  Century. Studies and Documents. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.
Breuer, D. ed. Frommigkeit in der fruhen Neuzeit: Studien zur religiosen Literatur des 17.
  Jahrhunderts in Deutschland. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1984.
Boyer, C.B. The Concept o/Calculus: A Critical and Historical Discussion o/the Derivative
  and the Integral. New York: Columbia University Press, 1939.
Broad, C.D. Leibniz: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
Brown, S. Leibniz. Sussex: The Harvester Press, 1984.
-   "Leibniz and More's Cabbalistic Circle." In Henry More (1614-1687): Tercentenary
  Studies, pp. 77-95. Edited by Hutton.
                                                                      Bibliography 205

Butts, R.E. "Leibniz's Monads: A Heritage of Gnosticism." Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
  Vo!. 10 (1980), 7-62.
Cassirer, E. Leibniz' System in seinem wissenschaftlichen Grundlagen (1902), 2nd ed., Darmstadt: Wiss. Buchgesellschaft, 1962.
Child, J .M., tr. The Early Mathematical Mansuscripts ofLeibniz. Chicago: Open Court, 1920.
Conway, A. The Principles of the Most Ancient and Modern Philosophy concerning God,
  Christ and the Creatures ... . London, 1692, repr, P. Loptson, ed., International Archives of
  the History of Ideas. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982. Loptson's edition republishes the
  original English translation, which is extremely obscure in many places. My colleague Taylor
  Corse and I have made new translation of this work which will be published by Cambridge
  University Press in 1995 as part of the Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy. In this
  monograph I have used the new translation, but I have referred the reader to the Loptson
  edition.
Cook, D. "Den 'anderen' Leibniz verstehen." SL 34 (1992),59-72.
- "Leibniz: Biblical Historian and Exegete." In Auseinandersetzung mit Vorgdngern und
  Zeitgenossen, pp. 267-76. Edited by Marchlewitz and Heinekamp.
- "Leibniz's Use and Abuse of Judaism and Islam" (the author kindly sent me a draft of this
  paper).
Copenhaver, Brian P. Hermetica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
-    "Hermes Trismgegistus, Proclus, and the Question of a Philosophy of Magic in the
  Renaissance". In Hermeticism and the Renaissance, pp. 79-110. Edited by Merkel and
  Debus.
- "Natural magic, hermetism, and occultism in early modern science." In Reappraisals of
  the Scientific Revolution, pp. 261-301. Edited by Lindberg and Westman.
Costabel, P. Leibniz and Dynamics (1960), tr. R.E.W. Madison. Ithaca: Cornell University
  Press, 1973.
Coudert, A.P. Alchemy: The Philosopher's Stone. London: Wildwood House, 1980.
- "A Cambridge Patonist's Kabbalist Nightmare" JR/ 35 (1975), 633-52.
- "Christian Knorr von Rosenroth (1636-1687)." Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie,
  forthcoming.
- "Henry More, the Kabbalah, and the Quakers." In Philosophy, Science, and Religion in
  England (1640-1700), pp. 31-67. Edited by Ashcraft, Kroll, Zagorin.
- "The Kabbala Denudata: Converting Jews or Seducing Christians?" In Christian-Jews
  and Jewish-Christians, pp. 73-96. Edited by Popkin and Weiner. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994.
- "Some Theories of a Natural Language from the Renaissance to the Seventeenth Century."
  SLSH7 (1978), 56-114.
Couturat, L. La Logique de Leibniz d'apres des documents inedits (paris, 1901), repro
  Hildesheim: Olms, 1961.
- "Sur la m~taphysique de Leibniz." Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale 10 (1902), repro
  in Leibniz: A Collection of Critical Essays, pp. 19-45. Edited by Frankfurt.
Cudworth, R. The True Intellectual System of the Universe. London, 1678.
Dobbs, B.J.T. The Janus Face ofGenius: the Role ofAlchemy in Newton's Thought. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Erikson, A. Letters to Erik Benzelius the Younger from Learned Foreigners (Acta Regiae
  Societatis Scientiarum et Litterarurn Gothoburgensis: Humaniora 16), 2 vols. G5teborg:
  Kung!. Vetenskaps-ochs Vitterhets-Samh!Hlet, 1979.
Feilchenfeld, W. "Leibniz und Henry More: Ein Beitrag zur Entwicklung der Monadologie."
  Kantstudien 28 (1923),323-334.
Fichant, M. "Ewige Wiederkehr oder unendlicher Fortschritt: Die Apokatastasisfrage bei
  Leibniz." SL 33 (1991), 133-150.
Fichant, M., ed. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: De l'Horizon de la Doctrine Humaine (1693);
   'A1tOK(l'taatacn~ 7t<lvtWV (La Restitution universe lie) (1715). Textes in&iits, traduit et annot~
  par M. Fichant. Paris: J. Vrin, 1991.
Finke, M. "Toleranz und 'Discret' Fr~mmigkeit nach 1650: Pfalzgraf Christian August von
  Sulzbach und Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels." In Frommigkeit in der friihen Neuzeit: Studien
  zur religiosen Literatur des 17. Jahrhunderts in Deutschland, pp. 193-212. Edited by Breuer.
Frankel, L. "Anne Finch, Viscountess Conway." In A History of Women Philosophers, iii,
  pp. 41-58. Edited by Waithe.
- "Being Able to Do Otherwise: Leibniz on Freedom and Contingency." Studia Leibnitiana
  16 (1984), 45-59.
- "Causation, Harmony, and Analogy." In Leibnizian Inquiries, pp. 57-70. Edited by Rescher.
Frankfurt, H., ed. Leibniz: A Collection of Critical Essays. Notre Dame: University of Notre
  Dame Press, 1972.
Fried, D. "Necessity and Contingency in Leibniz." In Leibniz: Metaphysics and Philosophy of
  Science, pp. 55-63. Edited by Woolhouse.
Friedman, J. The Most Ancient Testimony: Sixteenth-Century Christian-Hebraica in the Age
  of Renaissance Nostalgia. Athens, Ohio: Ohio State University Press, 1983.
Friedmann, G. Leibniz et Spinoza. Paris: Gallimard, 1960 (first published 1946).
Garber, D. "Leibniz and the Foundations of Physics: The Middle Years." In The Natural
  Philosophy oJLeibniz, pp. 27-130. Edited by Okruhlik and Brown.
Gale, George "Phy'~ics, Metaphysics, and Natures: Leibniz's Later Aristotelianism." In Leibnizian Inquiries, pp. 95-102. Edited by Rescher.
Goltz, D. "Zur Geschichte der Sublimation," CIBA, Rundshau (1970-1973), 38-48.
Gombrich, E.H. "leones Symbolicae: Philosophies of Symbolism and their Bearing on Art."
  In Symbolic Images: Studies in the Art of the Renaissance. London, 1972.
Grosholz, E. "Leibniz' Formalist Realism and an Early Problem in the Theory of Differential
  Equations." In Leibnizian Inquiries, pp. 37-43. Edited by Rescher.
Guhrauer, G. G. W. von Leibniz: Eine Biographie. Breslau, 1842.
GrUnder, K. and W. Schmidt-Biggemann, eds. Spinoza in der Friihzeit seiner religiosen
  Wirkung. Heidelberg: Verlag Lambert Schneider, 1984.
Grua, G. La Justice humaine selon Leibniz. Paris, 1956.
Hartz, G.A. "Launching a Materialist Ontology: The Leibnizian Way." History of Philosophy
  Quarterly, Vol. 1 (1984), 315-32.
- "Leibniz on Why Descartes' Metaphysics of Body is Necessarily False." In Leibnizian
  Inquiries, pp. 23-43. Edited by Rescher.
Hein, H. "The Endurance of the Mechanism-Vitalism Controversy." Journal of the History of
  Biology 5 (1972), 159-88.
Heinekamp, A. "Sprach und Wirklichkeit bei Leibniz." In History of Linguistic Thought and
  Contemporary Linguistics. Edited by Parret.
Helmont, F.M. Aanmerkingen von Franciscus Mercurius van Helmont, over den mens, en
  desselfs Siektens ... . Amsterdam, 1692 [Latin 1692; English 1694].
- Alphabeti vere naturalis Hebraici brevissima Delineatio quae simul methodum suppeditat,
  juxta quam qui surdi nati sunt sic informari possunt, ut non alios saltern loquentes intelligent.
  ... Sulzbaci, 1667 [German edition 1667; Dutch 1697].
- A Cabbalistical Dialogue in Answer to the Opinion of a learned Doctor in Philosophy and
  Theology, that the World was made of Nothing, as it is contained in the second part of the
  Cabbala Denudata ... . London, 1682.
- CL/ll Aphorismi Chemici... . Amsterdam, 1688 [English edition 1688 and 1690; French,
   1693; German, 1702).
- Desfurtrefflichen hochweisen Severini Boetii Christlich-vernunftgemesser Trost und Unterricht in Widerwertigkeit und Besturzung under dem vermeinten Wohl-oder Uebelstand der
                                                                      Bibliography 207

   Bosen und Frommen verteutschet (1667). 2nd edition with a preface by Leibniz. Lundburg.
   1697.
- The Divine Being and its Attributes ... according to the principles of F.M.B. of Helmont
   written in Low-Dutch by Paulus Buchius ... . London. 1693 [Dutch version referred to by
   Leibniz: Het godlyk weezen en deszelfs eygenschappen ... . Rotterdam. 1694].
- Der Italienisch Lycurgus ... . Sulzbach. 1666 [German edition 1666].
- Paradoxical Discourses of F.M. van Helmont, concerning the macrocosm and the microcosm ... . London, 1685 [Dutch 1693; German 1691].
- Memoirs, London, British Library, Sloane MS 530.
- Quaedam praemeditatae & consideratae Cogitationes super quatuor priora capita libri
   Moysis, Genesis nominati prolatae a Francisco Mercurio ab Helmont. Amsterdam, 1697
   [Dutch and German 1698; English 1701].
- Seder Olam ... . 1693 [English 1694].
- "A Short Discourse of ye Motif and Manner of Creating in the Low Countries Monti
   di Pieta," London, Royal Society, Classified Papers, 1660-1740, xxiv, Collins. Oldenburg.
   Hooke, no. 47.
- Two Hundred Queries moderately propounded concerning the Doctrine of the Revolution
   of Humane Souls ... . London. 1684 [German 1686].
Helmont, J.B. Oriatrike or, Physick Refined ...• tr. W. Charleton. London. 1662.
Hesse, M.B. "Hermeticism and Historiography: an Apology for the Internal History of Science." Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 5 (1971).
Holland. A.J .• ed. Philosophy, Its History and Historiography. Dordrect: D. Reidel. 1985.
Hooker, M., ed. Leibniz: Critical and Interpretive Essays. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982.
Hsia. R.P. The Myth ofRitual Murder: Jews and Magic in Reformation Germany. New Haven:
   Yale University Press, 1988.
HUbener, W. "Leibniz und der Renaissance- Lullismus." SLS 23 (1983), 103-12.
Hutin, S. "Leibniz a-t-il subi l'influence d'Henry More?" SL 2 (1979), 59-62.
Hutton, Sarah, ed. Henry More (/614-1687): Tercentenary Studies. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1990
- "Reason and Revelation in the Cambridge Platonists and their Reception of Spinoza."
   In Spinoza in der Fruzeit seiner religiosen Wirkung, pp. 181-200. Edited by GrUnder and
   Schmidt-Biggemann.
Idel, M. Kabbalah: New Perspectives. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.
- "The Magical and Neoplatonic Interpretations of the Kabbalah in the Renaissance." In
   Jewish Thought in the Sixteenth Century. pp. 186-242. Edited by Cooperman Cambridge,
   Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983.
Iltis (Merchant). C. "Leibniz and the Vis Viva Controversy." Isis 62 (1971).21-35.
Ishiguro. H. "Contingent Truth and Possible Worlds." In Leibniz: Metaphysics and Philosophy
   of Science, pp. 64-76. Edited by Woolhouse.
- Leibniz on Logic and Language. London: Duckworth, 1972.
Israel, J. European Jewry in the Age of Mercantilism. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1985.
Jacobs. L. "Eating as an Act of Worship in Hasidic Thought." In Studies in Jewish Religious and
   Intellectual History presented to Alexander Altmann ... .Tuscaloosa. Ala., 1979, pp. 157-66.
Jainter. K. "Der Pfalz-sulzbacher Hof in der europ!iischen Ideengeschichte des 17 Jahrhunderts." WolfenbUttler Beitrage. hrsg. Paul Raabe. 1988, pp. 273-404.
Jolley, N. Leibniz and Locke: A Study of the New Essays on Human Undersanding. Oxford:
   Clarendon Press, 1984.
- "Leibniz and Penomenalism." SL 18 (1986), 38-51.
Josten, C.H. "Truth's Golden Harrow, An unpublished Alchemical Treatise of Robert Fludd
   in the Bodleian Library." Ambix 3 (1949). 123-35.

-    "A Translation of John Dee's Monas Hieroglyphica (Antwerp, 1564) with an introduction
  and annotations." Ambix 12 (1964), 84-221.
Knecht, H.H. La Logique Chez Leibniz. Lausanne: Editions L' Age d 'Homme, 1981.
Knorr von Rosenroth, C. Kabbala Denudata ... . 2 vols. (1677, 1684), repro Hildesheim: Olms,
  1974.
- Des Vortrefflichen Engellanders Thomae Brown, der Artzney Dr. Pseudodoxia Epidemica
  ... durch Christian Peganium .... Frankfurt und Leipzig, 1680.
- Des vortrefflichen Herrn Johann Baptista Portae von Neapolis Magia naturalis ... hrg. von
  Christian Peganium sonst Rautner gennant. 2nd ed., NUmberg, 1713
- Aufgang der Artzney-Kunst, das ist: Noch nie erhOrte Grund-Lehren von der Natur, zu
  einer neuen Beforderung der Artzney-Sachen, so wol die Kranckheiten zu vertreiben als ein
  langes Leben zu erlangen. Geschrieben von Johann Baptista von Helmont ... (Sulzbach:
  Johann Andreae Endters, 1683), repro W. Pagel and F. Kemp, eds., 2 vols. Munich: K6sel,
  1971.
Knowlson, J. Universal Language Schemes in England and France, 1600-1700. Toronto and
  Buffalo: University of Toronto Press, 1975.
Kolakowski, L. Chretiens sans Eglise: La Conscience religieuse et Ie lien confessionnel au
  xvii siecle. Paris: Gallimard, 1969.
Langmuir, G. Toward a Definition of Antisemitism. Berkeley: University of California Press,
  1980.
LeClerc, I. The Philosophy ofLeibniz and the Modern World. Nashville: Vanderbilt University
  Press, 1973.
Lieder, F.W.C. "Fredrick Spee and the Theodicee of Leibniz." Journal ofEnglish and German
  Philology 11 (1912), 1-50.
Lindberg, D.C. and R.S. Westman, eds. Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Loeb, L.E. From Descartes to Hume: Continental Metaphysics and the Development ofModern
  Philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981.
Loemker, L.E. "Boyle and Leibniz." JHI16 (1955),22-43, repro in The Philosophy ofLeibniz
  and the Modern World, pp. 248-275. Edited by LeClerc.
- "Leibniz and the Herborn Encyclopedists." JHI22 (1961), 223-38, repro in Ibid., pp. 276297. Edited by Le Clerc.
-     "A Note of the Origin and Problem of Leibniz's Discourse of 1686." JHI 8 (1947),
  pp. 449-66, repr in Ibid., pp. 227-247. Edited by LeClerc.
-     Struggle for Synthesis: The Seventeenth Century Background of Leibniz's Synthesis of
  Order and Freedom. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972.
Mahnke, D. "Die Rationalisierung der Mystik bei Leibniz und Kant." Blatter for deutsche
  Philosophie 12 (1939).
Manuel, F.E. The Broken Staff: Judaism Through Christian Eyes. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
  University Press, 1992.
Marchlewitz, I: and A. Heinekamp, eds. Leibniz' Auseinandersetzung mit Vorgangern und
  Zeitgenossen. Studia Leibnitiana Supplementa 27. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1990.
Merchant (Iltis), C. "The Vitalism of Anne Conway: Its Impact on Leibniz's Concept of the
  Monad." JHP 17 (1979), 255-69.
Merkel, I. and A.G. Debus, eds. Hermeticism and the Renaissance: Intellectual History and
  the Occult in Early Modern Europe. Washington: Folger Books, 1988.
Meyer, R.W. Leibnitz and the Seventeenth-Century Revolution, tr. J.P. Stem. Chicago: Henry
  Regnery Company, 1952 (first published in German in 1948). The Philosophy of Leibniz:
  Fourteen of the most important books on Leibniz's Philosophy reprinted infifteen volumes.
  Edited by Sleigh, R.C. Jr. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1985.
Nason, J.W. "Leibniz and the Logical Argument for Individual Substances." In Leibniz: Metaphyscis and Philosophy of Science, pp. 11-29. Edited by Woolhouse.
                                                                     Bibliography 209

Needham, J. A History of Embryology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1934.
Nicolson, M. The Conway Letters (1930), rev. ed. Sarah Hutton, ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
  1992.
Oberman, H. The Roots of Anti-Semitism in the Age of Renaissance and Reformation, tr. J.I.
  Porter. Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1984.
O'Briant, W.F. ''Russell on Leibniz." SL 11 (1979), 159-222.
Okruhlik, K. and J.R. Brown, eds. The Natural Philosophy ofLeibniz. Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
  1985.
Orio de Miguel, B. "Leibniz und 'die physischen Monaden' von Fr. M. Van Hehnont." In
  Leibniz' Auseinandersetzung mit Vorgangern und Zeitgenossen, pp. 147~156. Edited by
  Marchlewitz and Heinekamp.
Ormsby, E.L. Theodicy in Islamic Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Pagel, W. Joan Baptista van Helmont: Reformer of Science and Medicine. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
- "J.B. Van Hehnont, De Tempore, and Biological Time." Osiris 8 (1949), 3~17.
- "Religious Motives in the Medical Biology of the XVIIth Century." Bulletin of the History
  of Medicine, Vol. 3 (1935).
Papineau, D. "The Vis Viva Controversy." In Leibniz: Metaphysics and the Philosophy of
  Science, pp. 139-56. Edited by Woolhouse.
Parret, H., ed. History ofLinguistic Thought and Contemporary Linguistics. Berlin: De Gruyter,
  1975.
Phemister, P. "Leibniz, Freedom of Will and Rationality." SL 33 (1991),25-39.
Patrides, C.A. ''The Salvation of Satan." JHI28 (1967), 467-78.
Politella, J. Platonism, Aristotelianism and Cabbalism in the Philosophy ofLeibniz. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1938.
Popkin, R.H. The History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza (1960), rev. ed. Berkeley
  and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1979.
-    "Leibniz and the French Sceptics." Revue Internationale de Philosophie 76-7 (1966),
  228-48.
- "Newton's Biblical Theology and his Theological Physics." In Newton's Scientific and
  Philosophical Legacy, pp. 81-97. Edited by Scheurer and Debrock.
- ''The Religious Background of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy." JHP 2S (1987),35-50.
- "The Third Force in 17th Century Philosophy: Scepticism, Science and Biblical Prophecy."
  Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres 1 (1983), 35-63.
- The Third Force in Seventeenth-Century Thought. Leiden: EJ. Brill, 1992.
Poser, H. "Leibniz' Pariseraufenthalt in seiner Bedeutung fUr die Monadenlehre." SLS 18
  (1978), 131-44.
Raab, H. 'Das "discrete Catholische" des Landgraften Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels (1623 bis
  1693). Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der ReunionsbemUhungen und der Toleranzbestrebungen
  im 17. Jahrhundert.' Archiv for Mittelrheinische Kirche-Geschichte 12 (1960), 175-98.
- "'Sincere et ingenue etsi cum Discretione.' Landgraf Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels (162393) fiber eine Reform von Papstum." In Beitrage zu kirchlichen Reformbemuhungen von
  der Alten Kirche bis zu Neuzeit. Festgabe for Erwin Iserloh, pp. 814-30. Edited by Baumer,
  Paderborn und MUnchen: Ferdinand ScMningh, 1980.
Rescher, N. Leibniz: An Introduction to his Philosophy. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1977.
- Lebniz's Metaphyscis ofNature. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1981.
- The Philosophy ofLeibniz. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1967.
-    ''The Contributions of the Paris Period (1672-76) to Leibniz's Metaphysics." SLS 18
  (1978), 43-54.
Rescher, N., ed. Leibnizjan Inquiries: A Group of Essays. New York and London: University
  Press of America, 1989.

Ritter, H. Geschichte der Philosophie. Hamburg: Friedrich Perthes, 1853, chapter 1 "Franz
  Mercurius von He1mont."
Robinet, A. "Le Discourse de m6taphysique dans la vie de Leibniz." Revue Internationale de
  Philososphie 20 (1966), 165-73.
- Malebranche et Leibniz, relations personnelles. Paris: J. Vrin, 1955.
Ross, G. MacDonald, Leibniz. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.
- "Leibniz and Renaissance Neoplatonism." SLS 22 (1983), 126-34.
- "Occultism and Philosophy in the Seventeenth Century." In Philosophy, Its History and
  Historiography. Edited by Holland.
Rossi, P. Clavis Universalis. Milan: R. Ricciardi, 1960.
- Francis Bacon: From Magic to Science. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1968.
Roth, L. "Hebraists and Non-Hebraists of the Seventeenth Century" Journal ofSemitic Studies,
  Vol. 6 (1961), 204-21.
Rudofsky, S. and J.H. Wotiz "Psychologists and the Dream Accounts of August KekuI6."
  Ambix 35 (1988), 31-38.
Russell, B. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy ofLeibniz (1900), 2nd ed. London: Allen
  and Unwin, 1937.
Russell, L.J. "The Correspondence between Leibniz and De VoIder." In Leibniz: Metaphysics
  and Philosophy of Science, pp. 104-118. Edited by Woolhouse.
Salecker, K. Christian Knorr von Rosenroth. Leipzig: Mayer & MUller, 1931.
Schaffer, S. "Occultism and Reason." In Philosophy, Its History and Historiography, pp. 117143. Edited by Holland.
Scheurer, P.B. and G. Debrock, eds. Newton's Scientific and Philosophical Legacy. Dordrecht:
  Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.
Schmitt, C.B. "The Perennial Philosophy from Agostino Steuco to Leibniz" JHI 27 (1966),
  505-23
- "Reappraisals in Reniassance Science." History of Science 16 (1978), 200-14.
Schoeps, H.J. Barocke Juden, Christen, Judenchristen. Bern und MUnchen: Francke Verlag,
  1965.
- Philosemitismus in Barock. TUbingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1952.
Scho1em, G. Kabbalah. New York: Meridian, 1974.
- Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism. New York: Schocken Books, 1954.
- "See1enwanderung und Sympathie der See1en in der jUdischen Mystick." Sonderdruck aus
  Eranos Jahrbuch 24. Zurich, 1956.
- "Die Wachterische Kontroverse Uber den Spinozismus und ihre Folgen." In Spinoza in der
  Friihzeit seiner religiOsen Wirkung, pp. 15-25. Edited by GrUnder and Schmidt-Biggemann.
Schrecker, P. "The Unity of Leibniz' Philosophical Thought." In Leibniz, Monadology and
  Other Philosophical Essays, tr' Paul and Anne Schrecker. Indianapolis and New York, 1965.
Schuchard, Marsha "Swedenborg, Jacobitism, and Freemasonry." In Swedenborg and His
  Influence, pp. 359-79. Edited by Brock E. Bryn Athyn: Academy of New Church, 1988.
Schuler, R. "Spiritual Alchemies of Seventeenth-century England." JHI41 (1980).
Seidler, M.J. "Freedom and Moral Therapy in Leibniz." SL, Vol. 17 (1985), 15-35.
Shachar, I. The Judensau: A Medieval Anti-Jewish Motif and its History. London: The Warburg
  Institute, 1974.
Sheppard, H.J. "Egg Symbolism in Alchemy" Ambix 6 (1958), l4Off.
- "Gnosticism and Alchemy." Ambix 6 (1957), 86-101.
- "A Survey of Alchemical and Hermetic Symbolism." Ambix 10 (1962), 83-96.
Sleigh, R.C., Jr. Leibniz & Arnauld: A Commentary on Their Correspondence. New Haven
  and London: Yale University Press, 1990.
Stein, L. Leibniz und Spinoza. Berlin: Reimer, 1890.
Tedeschi, J. The Prosecution ofHeresy: Collected Studies on the Inquisition in Early Modern
  Italy. Binghamton, NY: Medieval & Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1991.
                                                                    Bibliography 211

Thouverez, E., ed. Discours de Metaphysique. Paris, n.d.
Vickers, B. "Analogy and Identity." In Occult & Scientific Mentalities in the Reniassance.
  Edited by Vickers Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
- "Frances Yates and the Writing of History" Journal ofModern History 51 (1979), 287-316
- "On the Function of Analogy in the Occult" In Hermeticism and the Renaissance, pp. 26592. Edited by Merkel and Debus.
Waithe, M.E., ed. A History of Women Philosophers, vol 3. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991.
Walker, D.P. The Ancient Theology: Studies in Christian Platonism from the Fifteenth to the
  Eighteenth Centuries. London: Duckworth, 1972.
-    The Decline of Hell: Seventeenth Century Discussions of Eternal Torment. London:
  Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964.
- Spiritual and Demonic Magic. London, 1958.
Wall, E. van der ''The Amsterdam Millenarian Petrus Serrarius (1600-1669) and the AngloDutch Circle of Philo-Judaists" In Jewish-Christian Relations in the Seventeenth Century,
  pp. 73-94. Edited by Van den Berg and Van der Wall.
- "Johann Stephen Rittangel's Stay in the Dutch Republic (1641-42)." In Ibid., pp. 119-34.
Watson, R.A. The Breakdown of Cartesian Metaphysics. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities
  Press International, Inc, 1987.
- The Downfall of Cartesianism, 1673-1712. A Study ofEpistemological Issues in Late 17th
  Century Cartesianism. The Hague: Marinus Nijhoff, 1966
Webster, C. The Great lnstauration: Science, Medicine and Reform, 1626-1660. London:
  Duckworth, 1975.
-   From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the Making of Modern Science. Cambridge:
  Cambride University Press, 1982.
Westman, R.S. and J.E. McGuire Hermeticism and the Scientific Revolution. Los Angeles:
  Clark Library, 1977.
Wilson, C. Leibniz's metaphysics: a historical and comparative study. Manchester: Manchester
  University Press, 1989.
Wilson, M. "Leibniz's Dynamics and Contingency in Nature." In Leibniz: Metaphysics and
  Philosophy of Science, pp. 119-138. Edited by Woolhouse.
Woolhouse, R.S., ed. Leibniz: Metaphysics and Philosophy of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981.
- "The Nature of an Individual Substance." In Leibniz: Critical and lnterpretave Essays.
  pp. 45-64. Edited by Hooker.
Yates, F. The Art of Memory. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966.
- Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964.
-   "The Hermetic Tradition in Renaissance Science." In Art, Science, and History in the
  Renaissance. Edited by Singleton C.S. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1968.
- Lull & Bruno. Collected Essays, v. 1. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982.
- The Rosicrucian Enlightenment. London: Routeledge & Kegan Paul, 1972.
Yardeni, M. Anti-Jewish Mentalities in Early-Modern Europe. Lanham, NY: University Press
  of America, 1990.
                                        Index

Aarsleff, Hans, 150                           "breaking of the vessels," see Lurianic KabAdam Kadmon, 46, 105                               balah
Agrippa, Cornelius, 107                       Broad, D. C., 17
Aiton, E. J., 15-17,22,29,31,41,87,95         Brouncker, Lord, President of the Royal Socialchemy, 6-9, 15, 38,42, 65, 87, 95, 107-8,        ety, 41
      110, 119, 122, 156                      Brown, Stuart, 28-31, 40, 85-6, 95
   alchemist as gnostic savior, 107, 156      Browne, Thomas, 42
   optimism, 107-8                            Bruno, Giordano, 7-8, 33, 79-80, 156
   philosopher's stone as Christ, 117         Buchius, Paulus, 39, 54-7
Alphabet of Nature, see Helmont, F. M. van    Burnett, Thomas, 9, 15, 38-9, 88-9
Anaxagoras, 140                               Butts, R. E., 4-5,19
Andreae, J. V., 108
antisemitism, 43                              calculus, 4-5
Anton Ulric, Duke of WolfenbUttel, 49-50,     Calvin, John, 155
      68-9                                    Calvinism, 106
apocatastasis, see Origen                     Cambridge Platonists, 23-4, 123
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 83                       Campanella, Tommaso, 8, 33
archeus, see Helmont, J. B. van               Cardano, Girolamo, 79
Aristotle, 15, 19,24,75,96, 121, 137          Cartesianism, 8, 21-3, 33, 42, 54, 56, 78, 81,
Arnauld, Antoine, 10, 18, 22, 27, 32-3,45,          123, 139, 150
      56,83,100,155                           Celsius Secundus Curio, 55
ars combinatoria, see Leibniz                 Chimay, Princess de, 51-2, 66-7
                                              Christian August of Sulzbach, 11,42,74
Bacharach, N. ben Jacob, 145                  Comenius, Jon Amos, 26
Bacon, Francis, 108                           continuum, 18,23, 134
Baruzi, J., 2, 10                             Conway, Anne, 11,23,26-9,36,38,116,118Bayle, Pierre, 121, 140, 149                        9, 132
Becco, Anne, 12-13, 31-2, 38-9, 57, 71, 84,   Conway, Edward, II, 27
     122                                      corpuscular philosophy, 56
Benz, E., ix                                  Council of Constantinople, 109
Benzelius, Eric, 39, 70-1                     Couturat, Louis, 2, 22
Bernoulli, J., 91                             Crafft, J. D., 7, 65-6
Boehme, Jacob, 9, 70                          Cudworth, Ralph, 23-4, 33, 88
Boethius, 64-5, 67-8, 130
Boscovich, R. G., 97                          Dante, Alighieri, 125
Bourignon, Antoine, 10                        Dee, John, 152
Boyle, Robert, 6-7,11,36,150                  Descartes, Ren~, 2, 25, 36, 51, 75
                                              Discourse on Metaphysics, see Leibniz

214     Index

Dobrzenski, Baron, 39                             "judiazer", 12,37, 119
                                                  matter, 87-8
Elizabeth Charlotte, Duchess of Orleans, 49-      metempsychosis, 63, 116
      50, 53-4, 65, 69                            miraculous medicines, 51-2
Elizabeth, Palatine Princess, 6, 36, 51           monads, 26,36, 87,95,122,124
Emerald Table, 95                                 original sin, 109
Enlightenment, 108, 110, 155                      patent of nobility, 51
epitaph for van Helmont, 47, 79-80                perfectionism, 54, 57, 80, 118
Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels, 7, 35-6,47            punishment as redemptive, 118-119
                                                  Quakers, 12,36
Fichant, Michel, 109-12, 115, 117, 126            reincarnation, 37, 118
Ficino, Marsilio, 148, 152                        Seder Olam, 58-63
Fludd, Robert, 37,107                             Sophie Charlotte, Electress of BrandenFoucher de Careil, A., 1,2,26,75                         burg, relationship with, 49-51
Frankel, Lois, 136, 138-41                        Sophie, Electress of Hanover, relationship
Friedmann, G., 2, 26, 75-6, 137                          with,49-57
                                                  theodicy, 70, 104
Garber, Daniel, 17-21,31,79,88-9                  Thoughts on Genesis, 13, 31,.68, 84, 87,
Gassendists, 54-6                                        95,116-17,126, 146-7, 149, 151
gematria, 167                                     transmigration of souls, 35, 39, 54-5, 68-9,
gilgul, see Lurianic Kabbalah                            71,80, 106, 122
Gnosticism, 5,19-20,89,92-3,104,108,122,          uni versal medicine, 66-7
      137,141, 156                                universal salvation, 10, 39, 66, 106
Gregory of Nyssa, 55                              vitalism, 54-5,81
Grosholz, Emily, 141                            Helmont, J. B. van, 5, 19, 35, 42, 75, 79-80,
Grua, Gaston, 120, 125-6                             95-7,121, 141-3
                                                  ancheus, 19,96, 121, 142
Hardt, Herman von der, 68-70                      Aristotelianism, 19,96
Hebrew, as a "natural" language, 6, 145-150       causation, 142
hell, 10, 39, 54-5, 68, 133                       gas, 96,142
Helmont, F. M. van                                "husks", 96
   alchemy, 6-7, 9, 38, 65, 87                    matter, 105, 154
   Alphabet oj Nature, 6, 65, 149               Hermes Trismegistus, 95, 106-7
   atheism, refutation of, 87, 108              Hermeticism, 8, 42-3, 106, 110, 148, 156
      Cabbalistical Dialogue, 85-6, 122, 133    Hertel, Lorenz, 72
      Chemical Aphorisms, 68-9                  Hippocrates, 56
   creation,                                    Hobbes, Thomas, 25, 139, 150
      through emanation, 86-7, chapter 7        Horace, 29
      through thoughtllanguage, chapter 7       Hume, David, 136
      ex nihilo, 86, 123-4
  ecumenism, 9, 43-4, 135                       Idel, Moshe, ix, xi, 106
  Entwur.fJdes eigentlichen Naturlralphabets    infinity, 54, 57, 62,89,92-3, 119, 129
         der heiligen SpraChe' see Alphabetoj   Inquisition, 37, 41, 71, 119, 134
         Nature                                 Islam, 100
  epitaph by Leibniz, 12,39
  imprisonment by Inquisition, 10, 37, 119,     Jansenists,83
         134                                    Jerome, St., 55
      "farfelu",39                              Johann Friedrich, Duke of Hanover, 153
  hell, 10, 54, 67-8                            Judas, 54
  Imprisonment by Inquisition, 14, 37, 119,
         134                                    Kabbala Denudata, 6, 36, 43-6, 48, 60, 85,
  inventions, 11, 66                                93, 105, 120, 145
                                                                            Index 215

Kabbalah, ix-xi, I, see Lurianic Kabbalah       determinism, 2, 15,22,59, chapter 5
  difficulty and danger of studying, 37,44-5    Discours on Metaphysics, 13, 15-17, 19,
  modem world, 1                                      20-2, 27, 29-34, 45, 78, 100, 111,
Kant, Immanuel, 155                                    125, 138, 143, 148
Karl Ludwig, Elector Palatine, 51               dualism, 21, 24, 32, 59
Kempis, Thomas a, 129                           ecumenism, 9, 45
Knecht, H. H., 2                                emanation, 84, 86, 92, 128
Knorr von Rosenroth, Christian, 1, 6-7, 26,     entelechy, 60-1, 89-1,137, 142
     31,357,40-3,45-7, 54-5,60,63-5,68-         epitaph for van Helmont, 12, 39
     9,87,143,149                               evil, 102-4, 125, 128-9, 132
  alchemy, 41-2                                 force, 4, 15, 21-2, 33, 56, 60, 78, 89-92,
  as poet, 41-2, 48, 64                                123, 139, 150
  as translator, 42                             freedom and determinism, chapter 5
  ecumenism, 43-4                               German as "lingua Adamica", 150
  effect of Thirty Years' War, 43               ghostwriter for van Helmont, see Thoughts
  magical square, 42-3                                 on Genesis
  preface to van Helmont'sAlphabet ofNature,    Gnosticism, xi, 5,19-20,79,89,92-4,111,
         145-6, 152                                    122, 125, 141
  vitalism, 42                                  idealism, 16-18,84
Kochanski, Adam, 38                             infinity, 21, 54, 57, 62, 89, 92-3, 129
Kopp, Herman, 107                               Islam, 100
Krafft, see Crafft                              journal, 53, 57-8, 63-5
                                                Knorr von Rosenroth, Christian
Labadie, Jean de, 10                                meeting with, 1, 6, 41, 45
language, creative power of, ix, 144-8             notes of meeting, 45-7, 86
Lazarelli, Ludovico, 148                           opinion of, 40-3, 47-9,55,64
Leeuwenhoek, Anton, 15,22, 122                  language, see ars combinatoria, German,
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm                             "natural" language
   advice to van Helmont about writing, 67-9,   "Love-nix", 12
         71                                     Lutheranism, 103
   alchemy, 6-7. 9. 65,108                      man as microcosm, 111
      "flower" of substance, 95                 mechanical philosophy, 4, 8, 36, 140
   analogy in Leibniz's thought, 150            memoranda about van Helmont's philosoapocatastasis, 109-11, chapter 6                    phy, 35, 54-7, 65, 80-4
   Aristotelianism, 16-18,79,84,89,121          monads, 4, 20-2, 24, 26, 29, 30, 32, 60,
   ars combinatoria, 15, 102, III                     chapter 4,121, 123-4
   binary system, 87                               alchemy as source of concept, 15-16,
   calculus, 4-5                                          95,97
   Cartesianism, 8, 21-2, 27, 32, 36, 54, 56,      as "mirrors", 143
         78,81, 123, 139                           as "seeds", 97, 121
   causation, chapter 7                            Bruno as source, 79-80
      deductive model, 138                         Cardano as source, 79
      emanation model, 136-9                       Conway as source, 26-7, 29
      mechanical model, 138-9                      Cudworth as source, 23-4
      through language, 143-4, 147-8, 151          fulgurations of divine light, 136
      through thought, 138, 143, 147-8             Helmont, F.M. van, as source, 25-6, chapvolition model, 137-9, 144, 148                     ter 4
   Chinese Philosophy, 28                          Helmont, J. B. van, as source, 96-7, 121,
   continuum, 15, 19,23,30,93                             141
   creation, see causation                         interaction of, 137-8
      ex nihilo, 84-5, 87,123                      microscopic theories as source, 22
      from "seeds", 84-5, 94, 121                  More as source, 23, 29
216     Index

       Nicolas of Cusa as source, 79             Ludolph, Hiob, 48
       Thomasius as source, 15                   Lull, Raymond, 3,148-9,153-4
   Alonadology,8,16-20,22,26,32-3,79-80,         Luria, Isaac, x, 104-5, 117-120
         86,93,95,125,136-7,143,148              Lurianic Kabbalah, ix-xi, 5, 9-10, 23, 60-2,
   monism, xi, 24, 89, 91                              80,85,96,104,118,120
   More, Henry, 6-7, 76, 86,141                    Adam Kadmon, 46, 105
   mysticism, 2, 4                                  animism, x, 105
   New Essays, 18, 137                              "the breaking of the vessels" (shevirah-haNew System, 23, 29, 79                                 kelim), 93, 96, 104-5
   On the Radical Origination o/Things, 126,       creation by emanation, x, 45-6, 87, 92
         131-3                                     exile, x, 104
   On the True Theologia Alystica, 125              gilgul (reincarnation), x, 105, see transmioptimistism, 104, 108-9, 111                           gration, metempsychosis
   original sin, 93, 103, 109, 121                 Gnosticism, x, xi
   pansychism, 30, 143                             Hebrew as language of creation, 144-8
   pantheism, xi, 80, 136                          "husks", x, 45-7, 94, 104, 132
   Pelagianism, 10, 155                            man as microcosm, 45, 47
   perfectionism, 54, 57, 80-4,111,127,133         metempsychosis, 27, 63,116-8
   phenomenalism, 16-18,21,30,33,79,88-            monism, x, i, 105
         9,92,122,13&,141                          Neoplatonism and the Kabbalah, x, xi
   Plato, 83, 140                                  original sin, 45, 47, 120
   Platonism, 32, 55, 60, 103, 136                 pain and suffering as redemptive, 104
   plenum, 21, 92, 94                              reincarnation, 44, 104, see transmigration,
   pre-established harmony, 20,27-8, 139, 141-            metempsychosis, revolution
         2                                         revolution of souls, 118
   predestination, 108, 134                        role of man in redemptive process, 115
   preformation, 94, 121, 142                      se./iroth, 46, 105
   principle of sufficient reason, 138             "sparks", 94
   progress, 110, chapter 6                        tikkun,44, 104-5, 117, 124, 127
   Quietism, 6, 54, 56, 100                        theodicy, x, 104
   radicalism, 2, 39, 97                           transmigration, 35, 39, 54,6, 68-9, 71, 80
   rationalism, 2, 5-6, 25                         universal salvation, 104, 117, 127
   Rosicrucians, 108                               vitalism, x, 105
   Scholasticism, 4, 29                          Luther, 46, 106, 155
  sin, 125
  Socrates, 140                                  Mahnke, Do, 2
  space and time, 19,35                          Maimonides, 28
  Spinoza, 75-7,136                              Malebranche, No, 20,22,121
      Refutation inedite de Spinoza par Leib-    Malpighi, Mo, 22,121
            niz, 75                              mechanical philosophy, 2,4,8,36,42, 140
  Stoicism, 100, 102, 110                        Merchant, Carolyn, 26-1
  Theodicy, 102, 104, 109-110, chapter 6         Merode, Mme, 50-1, 53, 68, 71-4
  tikkun, 117, 124, 127                          metempsychosis, 27, 63,116-8
  transmigration, 39, 54-6, 71, 80, 122          Meyer, R. w., 2, 25
  universal language, 144, 148                   microcosm, 58, 107, Ill, 143, 156
  universal salvation, x, 39, 55,110, 116, 134   millenarianism, 45, 54, 115
  vis via controversy, 4, 17                     Molanus, Go, 47
  vitalism, 8, 27, 32, 54-5, 60, 81              monad, see Leibniz
  von Rosenroth, see Knorr von Rosenroth         Alonadology, see Leibniz
Lessing, Abbe de, 51-2                           More, Henry, 6, 11,23-4,26-8,32,37-8,42-3,
Locke, John, 7,11,150                                 76,85-6,122-3,156
Loernker, Leroy, 3-4, 16, 125, 132
                                                                                Index 217

Morell, Andre, 9, 37, 40, 84                    Quietists, 63, 65

"natural" language, 6, 145-54                   Renaissance Neoplatonism, 8,42, 141, 148,
Naylor, James, 156                                    156
Neoplatonism, 8, 34, 93, 104, 125, 136, 152     Renaissance occultism, 7-8, 80,141,143,149,
Newton, Isaac, 2, 5, 7,16,108,122                     151, 153
Nicolas of Cusa, 7, 26, 33, 7                   Rescher, N., 15
                                                revolution of souls, see memtempsychosis,
occultism, 1-2,7-8, see Renaissance occultism         reincarnation, transmigration
   role in development of modem science, 1,     Ritter, H., 25
         169                                    Rosenroth, see Knorr von Rosenroth
Oldenburg, Henry, 41                            Rosicrucianism, 70, 108
Orphica, 8, 43                                  Ross, G. MacDonald, 7, 11,92,97, 108
Origen, 55, 84, 107, 109-11, chapter 6          Rossi, Paolo, 7, 154
original sin, x, 93, 103, 121                   Royal Society, 9, 41
Orio de Miguel, Bernardino, 13,34               Rudolf August, Duke ofWolfenbiittel, 64, 69,
ouroboros, 95, 152                                    87
                                                Rupert, Prince Palatine, 51
Pagel, Walter, 96, 141-3                        Russell, Bertrand, 2-3,11,15,17,29,125
pantheism, xi, 75                               Russell, L. J., 90
Papineau, David, 4
Paracelsus, 2, 79-80, 96-7,156                  Schelhammer, G. C., 150
Pelagianism, x, 10, 106, 127, 155               Schoeps, J., 43
Penn, William, 10                               Scholasticism, 4, 19
perfectionism, xi, 1, 54, 57, 104, 106, 130,    Scholem, Gershom, ix, xi, 104
      133                                       Schuchard, Marcia, 70
Petersen,J. w., 111, 115-7, 120                 Schuller, G.H., 7
phenomenalism, see Leibniz                      SchUtz, Johann Friedrich, 6
Philadelphians, 70, 110                         Sefer Yezirah, ix, 145, 148
philosemitism, 43-4                             sefiroth, see Lurianic Kabbalah
Pico della Mirandola, 8, 103, 107, 111, 148     Serrarius, P, 54-5
   Oration on the Dignity of Man, 107           Sibylline Prophecies, 43
Pisani, Octavius, 6, 41                         Sleigh, R. C., 18-19, 33
Placcius, Vincent, 38-40                        Socrates, 140
Plato, 8, 70, 83, 136                           Smith, Thomas, 37
Platonism, 19,23-4,32,34,55,103,113,136,        Sophie Charlotte, Electress of Brandenburg,
      140, 148, 152                                   49,64-5,74,130
Plotinus, 23, 26, 33                            Sophie, Electress of Hanover, 6, 35, 38-9,49Popkin, Richard, 2                                    57,64-5,68-9,71,80, 130
Porta, J. B. della, 42                          Speath, J. P. (Moses Germanus), 12
Postel, Guillaume, 8, 46                        Spinoza, B., 2,15,26,75-7,136, 155
pre-established harmony, see Leibniz            Stoicism, 100, 102
pre-existence of souls, 46, 62                  Sturm, J. C., 150
predestination, x, 44, 134                      Swammerdam, J., 22, 121
preformation, see Leibniz
prisca theologia, 8, 43-5                       Talmud,47
Pythagoras, 8, 70, 83, 131                      Tauler, 129
Pythagorean Cabala, 70                          tetragrammaton, 145
                                                Theodicy, see Leibniz
Quakers, 6,10,27,36-7,110,156                   Thirty Years' War,43; 111
Quietism, 6, 54, 56, 100                        Thomasius, 15-16, 137
                                                tikkun, see Lurianic Kabbalah
218     Index

transmigration of souls, 35, 39, 54-6, 68-9,   Wachter,1. G., 75, 137
     71,80                                     Walker, D. P., 7, 133
                                               Webster, Charles, 7
universal character, see "natural" language    Wedderkop~~arcus, 15,99-100
universal salvation, x, 10, 39, 55, 109, 116   Weigel, V., 33
                                               Wilson, Catherine, 19-23,31-3,88-9, 155
Vickers, Brian, 7,142,152                      Wilson, ~argaret, 4
vis viva controversy, 4, 17
Vital, H., 105, 145                            Yates, Frances, 7, 108, 148
vitalism, 8, 19,24, 27, 32, 54-5, 60, 81         "Yates Thesis", 108
de VoIder, B., 89-92, 142
Voltaire, 124-5, 131                           Zohar, ix, 47-8
Von Rosenroth, see Knorr von Rosenroth
                                           *

 1. E. Labrousse: Pierre Bayle. Tome I: Du pays de foix II la cite d'Erasme. 1963; 2nd
    printing 1984                                                    ISBN 90-247-3136-4
    For Tome II see below under Volume 6.
 2. P. Merlan: Monopsychism, Mysticism, Metaconsciousness. Problems of the Soul in the
    Neoaristotelian and Neoplatonic Tradition. 1963; 2nd printing 1969
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0178-3
 3. H.G. van Leeuwen: The Problem of Certainty in English Thought, 1630-1690. With a
    Preface by RH. Popkin. 1963; 2nd printing 1970                   ISBN 90-247-0179-1
 4. P.W. Janssen: Les origines de la reforme des Carmes en France au 1~ Siecle. 1963;
    2nd printing 1969                                                ISBN 90-247-0180-5
 5. G. Sebba: Bibliographia Cartesiana. A Critical Guide to the Descartes Literature
    (1800-1960). 1964                                                ISBN 90-247-0181-3
 6. E. Labrousse: Pierre Bayle. Tome II: Heterodoxie et rigorisme. 1964
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0182-1
 7. K.W. Swart: The Sense of Decadence in 19th-Century France. 1964
                                                                    ISBN 90-247-0183-X
 8. W. Rex: Essays on Pierre Bayle and Religious Controversy. 1965
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0184-8
 9. E. Heier: L.H. Nicolay (1737-1820) and His Contemporaries. Diderot, Rousseau,
    Voltaire, Gluck, Metastasio, Galiani, D'Escherny, Gessner, Bodmer, Lavater,
    Wieland, Frederick II, Falconet, W. Robertson, Paul I, Cagliostro, Gellert, Winckelmann, Poinsinet, Lloyd, Sanchez, Masson, and Others. 1965        ISBN 90-247-0185-6
10. H.M. Bracken: The Early Reception of Berkeley's Immaterialism, 1710-1733. [1958]
    Rev. ed. 1965                                                    ISBN 90-247-0186-4
11. RA. Watson: The Downfall of Cartesian ism, 1673-1712. A Study of Epistemological
    Issues in Late 17th-Century Cartesianism. 1966                   ISBN 90-247-0187-2
12. R Descartes: Regull£ ad Directionem Ingenii. Texte critique etabli par Giovanni
    Crapulli avec la version hollandaise du 17e siec1e. 1966         ISBN 90-247-0188-0
13. J. Chapelain: Soixante-dix-sept Lettres inedites II Nicolas Heinsius (1649-1658).
    Publiees d'apres Ie manuscrit de Leyde avec une introduction et des notes par B. Bray.
    1966                                                             ISBN 90-247-0189-9
14. C. B. Brush: Montaigne and Bayle. Variations on the Theme of Skepticism. 1966
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0190-2
15. B. Neveu: Un historien II l'Ecole de Port-Royal. Sebastien Ie Nain de Tillemont
    (1637-1698). 1966                                                ISBN 90-247-0191-0
16. A. Faivre: Kirchberger et I' llluminisme du 18e siecle. 1966
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0192-9
17. J.A. Clarke: Huguenot Warrior. The Life and Times of Henri de Rohan (1579-1638).
    1966                                                             ISBN 90-247-0193-7
18. S. Kinser: The Works of Jacques-Auguste de Thou. 1966            ISBN 90-247-0194-5
19. E.F. Hirsch: Damiiio de Gois. The Life and Thought of a Portuguese Humanist (15021574).1967                                                       ISBN 90-247-0195-3
20. PJ.S. Whitemore: The Order of Minims in 17th-Century France. 1967
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0196-1
21. H. Hillenaar: Fenelon et les Jesuites. 1967                     ISBN 90-247-0197-X
                                          *

22. W.N. Hargreaves-Mawdsley: The English Della Cruscans and Their Time, 17831828. 1967                                                       ISBN 90-247-0198-8
23. C.B. Schmitt: Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola (1469-1533) and his Critique of
    Aristotle. 1967                                                   ISBN 90-247-0199-6
24. H.B. White: Peace among the Willows. The Political Philosophy of Francis Bacon.
     1968                                                             ISBN 90-247-0200-3
25. L. Apt: Louis-Philippe de Segur. An Intellectual in a Revolutionary Age. 1969
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-0201-1
26. E.H. Kadler: Literary Figures in French Drama (1784- 1834). 1969
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-0202-X
27. G. Postel: Le Thresor des prophities de l'univers. Manuscrit publie avec une
     introduction et des notes par F. Secret. 1969                    ISBN 90-247-0203-8
28. E.G. Boscherini: Lexicon Spinozanum. 2 vols., 1970            Set ISBN 90-247-0205-4
29. C.A. Bolton: Church Reform in 18th-Century Italy. The Synod of Pistoia (1786). 1969
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-0208-9
30. D. Janicaud: Une genealogie du spiritualisme franrais. Aux sources du bergsonisme:
     [Felix] Ravaisson [1813-1900] et la metaphysique. 1969           ISBN 90-247-0209-7
31. l-E. d' Angers: L'Humanisme chretien au 1~ siecie. St. Fran~ois de Sales et Yves de
     Paris. 1970                                                      ISBN 90-247-0210-0
32. H.B. White: Copp'd Hills towards Heaven. Shakespeare and the Classical Polity.
     1970                                                            ISBN 90-247-0250-X
33. P.J. Olscamp: The Moral Philosophy of George Berkeley. 1970
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-0303-4
34. C.G. Norefia: Juan Luis Vives (1492-1540). 1970                   ISBN 90-247-5008-3
35. J. O'Higgens: Anthony Collins (1676-1729), the Man and His World. 1970
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-5007-5
36. F.T. Brechka: Gerard van Swieten and His World (1700-1772). 1970
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-5009-1
37. M.H. Waddicor: Montesquieu and the Pilosophy of Natural Law. 1970
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-5039-3
38. O.R. Bloch: La Philosophie de Gassendi (1592-1655). Nominalisme, materialisme et
    metaphysique.1971                                                 ISBN 90-247-5035-0
39. J. Hoyles: The Waning of the Renaissance (1640-1740). Studies in the Thought and
    Poetry of Henry More, John Norris and Isaac Watts. 1971           ISBN 90-247-5077-6
    For Henry More, see also below under Volume 122 and 127.
40. H. Bots: Correspondance de Jacques Dupuy et de Nicolas Heinsius (1646-1656).
    1971                                                             ISBN 90-247-5092-X
41. W.C. Lehmann: Henry Home, Lord Kames, and the Scottish Enlightenment. A Study
    in National Character and in the History of Ideas. 1971           ISBN 90-247-5018-0
42. C. Kramer: Emmery de Lyere et Mamix de Sainte Aldegonde. Un admirateur de
    Sebastien Franck et de Montaigne aux prises avec Ie champion des calvinistes
    neerlandais.[Avec Ie texte d'Emmery de Lyere:] Antidote ou contrepoison contre les
    conseils sanguinaires et envinemez de Philippe de Mamix Sr. de Ste. Aldegonde. 1971
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-5136-5
                                          *

43. P. Dibon: Inventaire de la correspondance (1595-1650) d'Andre Rivet (1572-1651).
    1971                                                             ISBN 90-247-5112-8
44. K.A. Kottman: Law and Apocalypse. The Moral Thought of Luis de Leon (1527?1591). 1972                                                      ISBN 90-247-1183-5
45. F.G. Nauen: Revolution, Idealism and Human Freedom. Schelling, H61derlin and
    Hegel, and the Crisis of Early German Idealism. 1971             ISBN 90-247-5117-9
46. H. Jensen: Motivation and the Moral Sense in Francis Hutcheson's [1694-1746]
    Ethical Theory. 1971                                             ISBN 90-247-1187-8
47. A. Rosenberg: [Simon] Tyssot de Patot and His Work (1655-1738). 1972
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1199-1
48. C. Walton: De la recherche du bien. A study of [Nicolas de] Malebranche's [16381715] Science of Ethics. 1972
                                                                    ISBN 90-247-1205-X
49. PJ.S. Whitmore (ed.): A 17th-Century Exposure of Superstition. Select Text of
    Claude Pithoys (1587-1676). 1972                                ISBN 90-247-1298-X
50. A. Sauvy: Livres saisis a Paris entre 1678 et 1701. D'apres une etude preliminaire
    de Motoko Ninomiya. 1972                                         ISBN 90-247-1347-1
51. W.R. Redmond: Bibliography of the Philosophy in the Iberian Colonies of America.
    1972                                                             ISBN 90-247-1190-8
52. C.B. Schmitt: Cicero Scepticus. A Study of the Influence of the Academica in the
    Renaissance. 1972                                                ISBN 90-247-1299-8
53. J. Hoyles: The Edges of Augustanism. The Aesthetics of Spirituality in Thomas Ken,
    John Byrom and William Law. 1972                                ISBN 90-247-1317-X
54. J. Bruggeman and AJ. van de Ven (eds.): Inventaire des pieces d' Archives fran~aises
    se rapport ant a l' Abbaye de Port-Royal des Champs et son cercle et a la Resistance
    contre la Bulle Unigenitus et a l' Appel. 1972                   ISBN 90-247-5122-5
55. J.W. Montgomery: Cross and Crucible. Johann Valentin Andreae (1586-1654),
    Phoenix of the Theologians. Volume I: Andreae's Life, World-View, and Relations
    with Rosicrucianism and Alchemy; Volume II: The Chymische Hochzeit with Notes
    and Commentary. 1973                                         Set ISBN 90-247-5054-7
56. O. Lutaud: Des revolutions d 'Angle terre a la Revolution franraise. Le tyrannicide &
    Killing No Murder (Cromwell, Athalie, Bonaparte). 1973           ISBN 90-247-1509-1
57. F. Duchesneau: L'Empirisme de Locke. 1973                        ISBN 90-247-1349-8
58. R. Simon (M.): Henry de Boulainviller - CEuvres Philosophiques, Tome I. 1973
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1332-3
    For CEvres Philosophiques, Tome II see below under Volume 70.
59. E.E. Harris: Salvation from Despair. A Reappraisal of Spinoza's Philosophy. 1973
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-5158-6
60. J.-F. Battail: L'Avocat philosophe Geraud de Cordemoy (1626-1684). 1973
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1542-3
61. T. Liu: Discord in Zion. The Puritan Divines and the Puritan Revolution (1640-1660).
    1973                                                            ISBN 90-247-5156-X
62. A. Strugnell: Diderot's Politics. A Study of the Evolution of Diderot's Political
    Thought after the Encyclopedie. 1973                             ISBN 90-247-1540-7
                                            *

63. G. Defaux: Pantagruel et les Sophistes. Contribution 11 l'histoire de l'humanisme
    chretien au 16e siecle. 1973                                     ISBN 90-247-1566-0
64. G. Planty-Bonjour: Hegel et la pensee philosophique en Russie (1830-1917). 1974
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1576-8
65. RJ. Brook: [George] Berkeley's Philosophy of Science. 1973       ISBN 90-247-1555-5
66. T.E. Jessop: A Bibliography of George Berkeley. With: Inventory of Berkeley's
    Manuscript Remains by A.A. Luce. 2nd revised and enlarged ed. 1973
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1577-6
67. E.I. Perry: From Theology to History. French Religious Controversy and the Revocation ofthe Edict of Nantes. 1973                               ISBN 90-247-1578-4
68. P. Dibbon, H. Bots et E. Bots-Estourgie: Inventaire de la correspondance
    (1631-1671) de Johannes Fredericus Gronovius [1611-1671]. 1974
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1600-4
69. A.B. Collins: The Secular is Sacred. Platonism and Thomism in Marsilio Fieino's
    Platonic Theology. 1974                                          ISBN 90-247-1588-1
70. R. Simon (ed.): Henry de Boulainviller. CEuvres Philosophiques, Tome II. 1975
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1633-0
    For CEvres Philosophiques, Tome I see under Volume 58.
71. lA.G. Tans et H. Schmitz du Moulin: Pasquier Quesnel devant la Congregation de
    I 'Index. Correspondance avec Francesco Barberini et memoires sur la mise 11 l'Index
    de son edition des CEuvres de Saint Leon, publies avec introduction et annotations.
     1974                                                            ISBN 90-247-1661-6
72. lW. Carven: Napoleon and the Lazarists (1804-1809). 1974         ISBN 90-247-1667-5
73. G. Symcox: The Crisis of French Sea Power (1688-1697). From the Guerre
    d'Escadre to the Guerre de Course. 1974                          ISBN 90-247-1645-4
74. R. MacGillivray: Restoration Historians and the English Civil War. 1974
                                                                     ISBN 90-247-1678-0
75. A. Soman (ed.): The Massacre of St. Bartholomew. Reappraisals and Documents.
    1974                                                             ISBN 90-247-1652-7
76. R.E. Wanner: Claude Fleury (1640-1723) as an Educational Historiographer and
    Thinker. With an Introduction by W.W. Brickman. 1975             ISBN 90-247-1684-5
77. R.T. Carroll: The Common-Sense Philosophy of Religion of Bishop Edward Stillingfleet (1635-1699). 1975                                      ISBN 90-247-1647-0
78. J. Macary: Masque et lumieres au  lse  [siecle}. Andre-Fran~ois Deslandes, Citoyen et
    philosophe (1689-1757).1975                                      ISBN 90-247-1698-5
79. S.M. Mason: Montesquieu's Idea of Justice. 1975                  ISBN 90-247-1670-5
80. D.J.H. van Elden: Esprits fins et esprits geometriques dans les portraits de SaintSimon. Contributions 11 I'etude du vocabulaire et du style. 1975 ISBN 90-247-1726-4
81. I. Primer (ed.): Mandeville Studies. New Explorations in the Art and Thought of Dr
    Bernard Mandeville (1670-1733).1975                              ISBN 90-247-1686-1
82. e.G. Norefia: Studies in Spanish Renaissance Thought. 1975       ISBN 90-247-1727-2
83. G. Wilson: A Medievalist in the 18th Century. Le Grand d' Aussy and the Fabliaux ou
    Contes. 1975                                                     ISBN 90-247-1782-5
84. J.-R. Arrnogathe: Theologia Cartesiana. L'explication physique de l'Eucharistie chez
    Descartes et Dom Robert Desgabets. 1977                          ISBN 90-247-1869-4
                                              *

 85. Berault Stuart, Seigneur d' Aubigny: Traite sur l'art de la guerre. Introduction et
     edition par Elie de Comrninges. 1976                                 ISBN 90-247-1871-6
 86. S.L. Kaplan: Bread, Politics and Political Economy in the Reign of Louis XV. 2 vols.,
     1976                                                            Set ISBN 90-247-1873-2
 87. M. Lienhard (ed.): The Origins and Characteristics of Anabaptism / Les debuts et les
     caracteristiques de l'Anabaptisme. With an Extensive Bibliography I Avec une
     bibliographie detaillee. 1977                                        ISBN 90-247-1896-1
 88. R. Descartes: Regles utiles et claires pour la direction de l'esprit en la recherche de la
     verite. Traduction selon Ie lexique cartesien, et annotation conceptuelle par J.-L.
     Marion. Avec des notes mathematiques de P. Costabel. 1977            ISBN 90-247-1907-0
 89. K. Hardesty: The 'Supplement' to the 'Encyclopedie'. [Diderot et d' Alembert). 1977
                                                                          ISBN 90-247-1965-8
 90. H.B. White: Antiquity Forgot. Essays on Shakespeare, [Francis] Bacon, and Rembrandt. 1978                                                         ISBN 90-247-1971-2
 91. P.B.M. Blaas: Continuity and Anachronism. Parliamentary and Constitutional
     Development in Whig Historiography and in the Anti-Whig Reaction between 1890
     and 1930. 1978                                                      ISBN 90-247-2063-X
 92. S.L. Kaplan (ed.): La Bagarre. Ferdinando Galiani's (1728-1787) 'Lost' Parody. With
     an Introduction by the Editor. 1979                                  ISBN 90-247-2125-3
 93. E. McNiven Hine: A Critical Study of [Etienne Bonnot de} Condillac's [1714-1780]
     'Traite des Systemes'. 1979                                          ISBN 90-247-2120-2
 94. M.R.G. Spiller: Concerning Natural Experimental Philosphy. Meric Casaubon [15991671] and the Royal Society. 1980                                    ISBN 90-247-2414-7
 95. F. Duchesneau: La physiologie des Lumieres. Empirisme, modeles et theories. 1982
                                                                          ISBN 90-247-2500-3
 96. M. Heyd: Between Orthodoxy and the Enlightenment. Jean-Robert Chouet [16421731] and the Introduction of Cartesian Science in the Academy of Geneva. 1982
                                                                          ISBN 90-247-2508-9
 97. James O'Higgins: Yves de Vallone [166617-1705]: The Making of an Esprit Fort.
     1982                                                                 ISBN 90-247-2520-8
 98. M.L. Kuntz: Guillaume Postel [1510-1581). Prophet of the Restitution of All Things.
     His Life and Thought. 1981                                           ISBN 90-247-2523-2
 99. A. Rosenberg: Nicolas Gueudeville and His Work (1652-172?). 1982
                                                                         ISBN 90-247-2533-X
100. S.L. Jaki: Uneasy Genius: The Life and Work of Pierre Duhem [1861-1916]. 1984
                                             ISBN 90-247-2897-5; Pb (1987) 90-247-3532-7
101. Anne Conway [1631-1679]: The Principles of the Most Ancient Modem Philosophy.
     Edited and with an Introduction by P. Loptson. 1982                  ISBN 90-247-2671-9
102. E.C. Patterson: [Mrs.} Mary [Fairfax Greig} Sommerville [1780-1872] and the
     Cultivation of Science (1815-1840). 1983                             ISBN 90-247-2823-1
103. c.J. Berry: Hume, Hegel and Human Nature. 1982                       ISBN 90-247-2682-4
104. c.J. Betts: Early Deism in France. From the so-called 'deistes' of Lyon (1564) to
     Voltaire's 'Lettres philosophiques' (1734). 1984                     ISBN 90-247-2923-8
                                            *

105. R. Gascoigne: Religion, Rationality and Community. Sacred and Secular in the
      Thought of Hegel and His Critics. 1985                           ISBN 90-247-2992-0
106. S. Tweyman: Scepticism and Belief in Hume's 'Dialogues Concerning Natural
      Religion'. 1986                                                  ISBN 90-247-3090-2
107. G. Cerny: Theology, Politics and Letters at the Crossroads of European Civilization.
      Jacques Basnage [1653-1723] and the Baylean Huguenot Refugees in the Dutch
      Republic. 1987                                                  ISBN 90-247-3150-X
108. Spinoza's Algebraic Calculation of the Rainbow & Calculation of Changes. Edited
      and Translated from Dutch, with an Introduction, Explanatory Notes and an Appendix
      by M.J. Petry. 1985                                              ISBN 90-247-3149-6
109. R.G. McRae: Philosophy and the Absolute. The Modes of Hegel's Speculation. 1985
                                                                       ISBN 90-247-3151-8
110. J.D. North and 1.1. Roche (eds.): The Light of Nature. Essays in the History and
      Philosophy of Science presented to A.C. Crombie. 1985            ISBN 90-247-3165-8
Ill. C. Walton and P.J. Johnson (eds.): [Thomas] Hobbes's 'Science of Natural Justice'.
      1987                                                             ISBN 90-247-3226-3
112. B.W. Head: Ideology and Social Science. Destutt de Tracy and French Liberalism.
      1985                                                            ISBN 90-247-3228-X
113. A.Th. Peperzak: Philosophy and Politics. A Commentary on the Preface to Hegel's
      Philosophy of Right. 1987          ISBN Hb 90-247-3337-5; Pb ISBN 90-247-3338-3
114. S. Pines and Y. Yovel (eds.): Maimonides [1135-1204] and Philosophy. Papers
     Presented at the 6th Jerusalem Philosophical Encounter (May 1985). 1986
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-3439-8
115. T.J. Saxby: The Quest for the New Jerusalem, Jean de Labadie [1610-1674] and the
     Labadists (/610-1744). 1987                                      ISBN 90-247-3485-1
116. C.E. Harline: Pamphlets, Printing, and Political Culture in the Early Dutch Republic.
      1987                                                            ISBN 90-247-3511-4
117. R.A. Watson and lE. Force (eds.): The Sceptical Mode in Modem Philosophy. Essays
     in Honor of Richard H. Popkin. 1988                             ISBN 90-247-3584-X
118. R.T. Bienvenu and M. Feingold (eds.): In the Presence of the Past. Essays in Honor of
     Frank Manuel. 1991                                              ISBN 0-7923-1008-X
119. J. van den Berg and E.G.E. van der Wall (eds.): Jewish-Christian Relations in the
     17th Century. Studies and Documents. 1988                       ISBN 90-247-3617-X
120. N. Waszek: The Scottish Enlightenment and Hegel's Account of 'Civil Society'. 1988
                                                                      ISBN 90-247-3596-3
121. J. Walker (ed.): Thought and Faith in the Philosophy of Hegel. 1991
                                                                      ISBN 0-7923-1234-1
122. Henry More [1614-1687]: The Immortality of the Soul. Edited with Introduction and
     Notes by A. Jacob. 1987                                          ISBN 90-247-3512-2
123. P.B. Scheurer and G. Debrock (eds.): Newton's Scientific and Philosophical Legacy.
     1988                                                             ISBN 90-247-3723-0
124. D.R. Kelley and R.H. Popkin (eds.): The Shapes of Knowledge from the Renaissance
     to the Enlightenment. 1991                                       ISBN 0-7923-1259-7
                                            *

125. R.M. Golden (ed.): The Huguenot Connection. The Edict of Nantes, Its Revocation,
     and Early French Migration to South Carolina. 1988                ISBN 90-247-3645-5
126. S. Lindroth: Les chemins du savoir en Suede. De la fondation de I'Universite d'Upsal
     a Jacob Berzelius. Etudes et Portraits. Traduit du suedois, presente et annote par l-F.
     Battail. Avec une introduction sur Sten Lindroth par G. Eriksson. 1988
                                                                       ISBN 90-247-3579-3
127. S. Hutton (ed.): Henry More (1614-1687). Tercentenary Stutlies. With a Biography
     and Bibliography by R. Crocker. 1989                              ISBN 0-7923-0095-5
128. Y. Yovel (ed.): Kant's Practical Philosophy Reconsidered. Papers Presented at the 7th
     Jerusalem Philosophical Encounter (December 1986). 1989           ISBN 0-7923-0405-5
129. J.E. Force and R.H. Popkin: Essays on the Context, Nature, and Influence of Isaac
     Newton's Theology. 1990                                           ISBN 0-7923-0583-3
130. N. Capaldi and D.W. Livingston (eds.): Liberty in Hume's 'History of England'. 1990
                                                                       ISBN 0-7923-0650-3
131. W. Brand: Hume's Theory of Moral Judgment. A Study in the Unity of A Treatise of
     Human Nature. 1992                                                ISBN 0-7923-1415-8
132. C.E. Harline (ed.): The Rhyme and Reason of Politics in Early Modem Europe.
     Collected Essays of Herbert H. Rowen. 1992                        ISBN 0-7923-1527-8
133. N. Malebranche: Treatise on Ethics (1684). Translated and edited by C. Walton. 1993
                                                                       ISBN 0-7923-1763-7
134. B.C. Southgate: 'Covetous of Truth'. The Life and Work of Thomas White
     (1593-1676). 1993                                                 ISBN 0-7923-1926-5
135. G. Santinello, C.W.T. Blackwell and Ph. Weller (eds.): Models of the History of
     Philosophy. Vol. 1: From its Origins in the Renaissance to the 'Historia Philosphica'.
     1993                                                              ISBN 0-7923-2200-2
136. M.J. Petry (ed.): Hegel and Newtonianism. 1993                    ISBN 0-7923-2202-9
137. Otto von Guericke: The New (so-called Magdeburg) Experiments [Experimenta Nova,
     Amsterdam 1672]. Translated and edited by M.G.Foley Ames. 1994
                                                                       ISBN 0-7923-2399-8
138. R.H. Popkin and G.M. Weiner (eds.): Jewish Christians and Cristian Jews. From the
     Renaissance to the Enlightenment. 1994                            ISBN 0-7923-2452-8
139. lE. Force and R.H. Popkin (eds.): The Books of Nature and Scripture. Recent Essays
     on Natural Philosophy, Theology, and Biblical Criticism in the Netherlands of
     Spinoza's Time and the British Isles of Newton's Time. 1994 ISBN 0-7923-2467-6
140. P. Rattansi and A. Clericuzio (eds.): Alchemy and Chemistry in the 16th and 17th
     Centuries. 1994                                                   ISBN 0-7923-2573-7
141. S. Jayne: Plato in Renaissance England. 1995                      ISBN 0-7923-3060-9
142. A.P. Coudert: Leibniz and the Kabbalah. 1995                      ISBN 0-7923-3114-1

KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS - DORDRECHT I BOSTON I LONDON