See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/288419622
Final word:Putting the "alter" in alternative food futures
Article in New Zealand Sociology · January 2013
CITATIONS                                                                                                 READS 6                                                                                                         87
1 author:
            Michael S Carolan             Colorado State University             163 PUBLICATIONS 5,520 CITATIONS
              SEE PROFILE
 All content following this page was uploaded by Michael S Carolan on 25 March 2016.
 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.    Carolan, Michael 2013. Putting the ‘Alter’ in Alternative    Food Futures, NewZealand Sociology 28(4), pp. 145-50
Putting the “Alter” in Alternative Food Futures
Michael Carolan
Professor and Chair
Department of Sociology
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1784
USA
mcarolan@colostate.edu
       It is the wickedest of problems. If what we know is truly embedded in practice, in our
routines, habits, and embodied performances (Carolan 2011), than we have to do food futures
before we perceive them. How do you enact an alternative reality before thinking it? Without
coming right out and saying it, this Special Issue collectively attempts to make sense of this
complex emergent nexus between practice, thought, doing, and being. It also shows, leaving
the reader (hopefully) more hopeful about the future of food, that enacting alternatives is not impossible. Practice might not make perfect but it does create difference. And there is
something immensely hopeful about that.
        There are many ways one can read this empirically and conceptually rich suite of papers.
Indeed, each reading elicited within me its own unique flight of experience—a collection of
affective encounters that generated feelings of possibility that prefigure a broader collective
politics. One recurring encounter allowed me to locate this Special Issue within a still fledgling,
but maturing rapidly, body of scholarship seeking to move beyond a totalizing economic
narrative, as exemplified by recent research on, for example, “pious neoliberalism” (Atia 2012),
“progressive neoliberalism” (Lewis 2009), and the “domestication of neoliberalism” (Smith and
Rochovsha 2007). Instead of embracing “a kind of structuralist paranoia” (Gibson-Graham
2008, p. 62), which inadvertently reproduces the very dominant order it seeks to critique by
choosing to focus on sameness rather than difference, these articles add to the patchwork of
practices and performances that show us a world full of “diverse economies” (Brown 2009). I
will now address in no particular order the papers and the hopeful message I gleaned from
each.
        Rebecca Duell seeks to further disrupt an already messy politics of local food. Is “local
food”, as an actual thing, just another example of capital’s uncanny ability to follow in the
footsteps of activists and capital-ize upon their successes? There is without question what
could be called dominance-power embedded within this politics, as evidence by what local food
has tended to fetishize (e.g., geophysical distance over social justice). Yet as Duell reminds us
there is also at work what I like to call difference-power within these micro-movements, as evidenced by the multitude of performances from below that work to substitute passive
consumer choice for active citizen choice (Carolan 2014a). The politics of local food is indeed
weighed down by the weight of capitalist logics but this heaviness should not be confused with
totality. For as Mikulak (2013, p. 22) points out, “the micro-utopian embodiments of
alternative values” have the ability to break through the seemingly impenetrable concreteness
of present structures, if we only allow them the opportunity.
       Cororina Tucker takes up the subject of taste’s sociological fluidity, specifically as it
applies to eating animals “nose-to-tail”. The materiality of offal—liver, kidneys, testicles, eyes,
and the like—has changed little over the last century. And yet few have a taste for this food
anymore. Indeed, many would even question whether “food” is the correct designate for these
artifacts, preferring instead that of “waste”. Tucker’s fascinating empirical exploration into the
entanglements of taste speaks not of a collective movement toward any global taste profile.
Taste is not something we think but something we do (Carolan 2011). And because
consumption practices vary widely so do our doings of taste. This study reminded me of the
research done by the American anthropologist Marvin Harris (1986, p. 13). Roughly 30 years
ago, in Good to Eat: Riddles of Food and Culture, Harris made the delightfully hopeful
observation that “we can eat and digest everything from rancid mammary gland secretions to
fungi to rocks,” or cheese, mushrooms, and salt if you prefer using culturally accepted
euphemisms. Many view a “nose-to-tail” diet as unthinkable. That would appear as an
insurmountable barrier to changing diets, until it is realized how cultural practices set the
boundaries between the probable and improbable. Change those and a whole new world of
possibilities, and tastes, opens up.        The food future offered by Claire Parfitt might initially sound dystopic, the “enclosure”
of genetic resources into the circuit of capital accumulation. This narrative is further reinforced
after one takes into consideration the general trajectory of intellectual property rights, the
TRIPs (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights) agreement, and biopiracy. There
is plenty of dominance-power at work here, as evidenced by how the World Trade
Organization, through TRIPs, has been able to essentially homogenize patent law around much
of the world (Carolan 2010). But let us not be too quick to ignore difference-power, those
spaces of hope that short-circuit processes of capital accumulation. Partfitt hints at these
spaces too, such as when she makes note of the more than 50 organic farmers in the US who
brought suit against Monsanto. Other examples would include spaces being created by La Via
Compensia or the heterogeneous network of seed savers that stretches across six continents.
Or, to take a very recent development, just days ago—October 16, 2013, to be exact—a judge
in Mexico City placed an indefinite ban on genetically-engineered corn within Mexico. Effective
immediately, companies such as Monsanto and DuPont/Pioneer are no longer allowed to plant
or sell their corn within the country’s borders (Robbins, 2013). Parfitt is spot on, with her
sketch of one particular aspect of a food future the agrifood industry would like to enact. Their
grip on the future is not monolithic, however. The challenge then becoming identifying those
spaces of difference (and thus of hope) and multiplying them.
       Alison Henderson provides a timely piece on the health claims around food, by asking
what counts as healthy and who is doing that counting? Food companies today are busy trying
to find ways to blur boundaries between medicine and food, as high tech ingredients promise,
drawing upon terms mentioned by Henderson, to “harness the power of nature” in order to “optimize” health. As Henderson warns, however, we must be cautious of these claims as they
are tied to situated knowledge systems that are attempting to enact very distinct food futures.
Let us not forget there are many ways to understand “health”. The venerable World Health
Organization (nd) has been defining the term since 1948 as “a state of complete physical,
mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity”. How well do
the so called super foods included in Henderson’s analysis stack up to this definition? Were
they produced sustainably? Were the workers, along the entire commodity chain, fairly
compensated for their labor? Were migrant laborers used and if so how were they treated (a
question particularly relevant for products originating out of the United States)? You cannot
make health claims about a product, if we were to follow the WHO’s definition, without first
looking into these questions. As Henderson notes in her concluding paragraph, not all situated
knowledges—and thus situated food futures—see these super foods as being all that super or
all that healthy.
        Margaret Forster’s paper is a delightfully hopeful analysis of Māori agency as it plays
through and around a very Western-centric style of Foucaultian governmentality. The Māori
literally embody a repertoire of doings that have the potential of making the un-thought
thinkable and the undoable routine. Forster points to a number of tantalizing examples of
where these doings are creating meaningful points of difference in how value creation is being
done, such as the Ngai Tahu sustainable dairying project and how it integrates Māori
environmental and socio-cultural goals with economic development. Some might take these
Māori economic ventures as instances of dominance; a case of uncreative destruction—or, to put it even more simply, death by neoliberalism. But that is too simple a reading of what is
going on here. These are cases of multiplication, not of subtraction.
       I conclude mentioning the paper by Andrea Brower, which parallels in many ways some
of my own recent musings (see e.g., Carolan 2013, 2014b). Brower highlights the literal
eventfulness of “the possible”. This speaks to the point I made with my opening salvo when I
wrote that to know is to do, which, from the standpoint of enacting social change, means you
have to do something different before you can think something different. (For examples of
difference being enacted I recommend the recent Special Issue in New Zealand Geographer—
vol. XX, no. XX—highlighting the work of the Biological Economies group). I commend Brower
for taking up the task of attempting to name and explore the “fissures in the logics that sustain
capital” (or capitals, as these logics are never uniformly expressed) and that limit “imaginations
of the possible”, though I would add that to explore these fissures is more than just an
intellectual task. To explore difference is to do difference, which, especially when it comes to
food, means occasionally getting your hands dirty (such as in the case of saving seeds or
engaging in guerrilla gardening) and clothes torn (an occupational hazard, for example, of
dumpster diving).
       This brings me full circle to the paper’s title: putting the “alter” in alternative food
futures. The trick is not that we need to come up with fully formed food alternatives; such
thinking is not only misplaced but dangerous as it further subtracts from the diversity of
difference we ought to be striving for. The goal, rather, ought to be about creating spaces that
alter routine, thought, affectivities, and, ultimately, being. Perhaps we can think of this aim as one towards a politics of fermentation—an admittedly messy activity whereby people brew
themselves toward something/s new and that while never entirely in accordance with itself is
never directed from above either (Latour 1999, p. 247).
       Harvey (1990, p. 423) writes of the need to “penetrate the veil of fetishisms”, such as by
learning “how space and time get defined by these material processes which give us our daily
bread”. Not that this claim, even in 1990, was particularly novel. Well before then Pierre
Bourdieu, Michel De Certeau, Agnes Heller, and Henri Lefebvre (among others) had been busily
elaborating on how sociocultural fields and/or space constitute and are constituted by
processes and practices (versus those that see these practices as dictated by some totalizing
logic working “behind the backs” or “over the heads” of social actors, as Althusser (1979, p.
180). To be sure, some networks and assemblages are of greater “weight”—to use a metaphor
evoked by Lefebvre (1991, p. 366)—than others. But such pressures or tendencies do not equal
destiny, as everyday practices inevitably reflect the “ruses of other interests and desires that
are neither determined nor captured by the systems in which they develop” (Certeau 2011, pp.
xviii). That is one of the things that captured my interested in this suite of papers; not the fact
that the world is performed and enacted by our everyday practices but how certain practices
are made strange, become altered, and lead to novel enrollments/disenrollments.
       I have wondered what role my situtatedness as a scholar in the United States played in
this. The articles pointed out to me different doings and beings, differences that were
amplified by my non-antipode location (for instance, I know little about the beings and
becomings that are the Māori). I often hear, for example, from students about how they get depressed when they read case studies from around that world—the weight of neoliberalism is
indeed hard to miss. That is easy to do, if you choose to focus on dominance-power. Perhaps
we choose to ignore difference precisely because it is strange and choose to focus on
dominance because it is familiar.
       On that note, I will conclude (without fear of offending) by saying that I found this
grouping of articles to be very strange. Strange is good, at least in this case, because it is
disarming. And what better way to image altering food futures than from a position where the
veil of fetishisms, to evoke Harvey’s phrase, if not being penetrated is at least sufficiently
decentered to see around it.
                                            References
Althusser, L. (1979) The object of capital, In L. Althusser and E. Balibar Reading capital (London:
       Verso)
Atia, M. (2012) A way to paradise: pious neoliberalism, Islam, and faith-based development,
       Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102(4), pp. 808-827
Brown, G. (2009) Thinking beyond homonormativity: performative explorations of diverse gay
       economies. Environment and Planning A 41, pp. 1496-1510. Carolan, Michael 2010. Decentering Biotechnology: Assemblages Built and Assemblages
       Masked. Surrey: Ashgate
Carolan, Michael 2011 Embodied Food Politics. Surrey: Ashgate
Carolan, Michael 2013 The Wild Side of Agro-food Studies: On Co-experimentation, Politics,
       Change, and Hope, Sociologia Ruralis 53(4), pp. 413-431.
Carolan, Michael 2014a Future food ‘needs’: From consumer to citizen choice, Sociologia
       Ruralis in press.
Carolan, Michael 2014b. Agrifood Imaginaries: Making the Un-Thought Thinkable and the UnDoable Routine, Journal of Rural Studies in press.
Certeau, M. (2011) The practice of everyday life. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press)
Gibson-Graham, J.K. (2008) Diverse economies: performative practices for ‘other words.
       Progress in Human Geography 32 (5) pp. 613–632
Harris, Marvin. (1986) Good to eat: Riddles of food and culture. London: Allen and Unwin.
Harvey, D. (1990) Between space and time: reflections on the geographical imagination. Annals
       of the Association of American Geographers 80(3), pp. 418-434.
Lefebvre, H. (1991) The production of space. (New York: Blackwell)
Latour, B. (1999) Pandora’s hope: essays on the reality of science studies Cambridge, MA:
       Harvard University Press.             Lewis, N. (2009) Progressive spaces of neoliberalism? Asia Pacific Viewpoint 50(2), pp. 113-119.
            Mikulak, Michael (2013) The Politics of the Pantry: Stories, Food, and Social Change. Montreal:
                         McGill-Queen’s University Press.
            Robbins, Ocean. 2013 Huge GMO news. Huffington Post October 19,
                         http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ocean-robbins/huge-gmo-news_b_4129311.html, last
                         accessed October 22, 2013
            Smith, A. and A. Rochovska (2007) Domesticating neoliberalism: everyday lives and the
                         geographies of post-socialist transformations. Geoforum 38, pp. 1163-1178.
            World Health Organization. n.d. “WHO Definition of Health.” Geneva: World Health
                         Organization. Retrieved October 23, 2013 (http:// www .who.int /about /definition /en
                         /print.html).
View publication stats