ARTICLES
 Digital Agroecology and the Inhuman: Paradigm  Crossroads
 Georgios Tsagdis1
 Abstract  A fourth agricultural revolution is pronounced on the strength of new digital technologies entering farming practice. Concerns that, left unchecked, this digital revolution will intensify the problems generated by the third agricultural revolution have  led major supranational actors such as the UN and the EU to promote the embedding of state-of-the-art digital technologies within agroecology, a movement that  foregrounds the wellbeing of both nature and farmers, drawing on traditional modes  of knowledge and practice. The article examines whether this aspiration to combine  “the best of both worlds” is feasible at the level of the basic commitments of agroecology and “agromodernism,” a term referring collectively to mainstream modes  of agriculture that utilise industrial and digital technologies to maximise productivity. The article shows how agroecology and agromodernism constitute contrasting  discursive frames and mindsets. At the same time, the article shows that agroecology and agromodernism share an oft-overlooked common ground. Drawing on the  work of Martin Heidegger, Jean-François Lyotard and Frédéric Neyrat the article  shows that agroecology and agromodernism are constricted by the technoscientific  “world-picture,” in which the world is infinitely constructible in the hands of the  human. The article argues, accordingly, for an alternative, “inhuman” agroecology.  Such an agroecology should welcome any technology that resists the totalising  tendency of evermore control over the land and foregrounds what exceeds human  values and interests.
 Keywords Agroecology · Digitalisation · Fourth agricultural revolution · Worldpicture · The inhuman
      Georgios Tsagdis       georgiostsagdis@outlook.com; georgios.tsagdis@wur.nl
 1       Wageningen University & Research, 12 Kleine Zonneplein, 1033 CM Amsterdam, The       Netherlands
 Introduction
 Agriculture is undergoing a great transformation, often pronounced the fourth agricultural revolution, driven by technologies such as robotics, variable rate chemical  applicators, the Internet of Things, big data, drones and automation (Balafoutis et  al., 2020). This transformation is marked by the double pressure of a burgeoning  world population and evermore strained life-support systems (Blok, 2017; Stone,  2022). Life-support systems include both wild ecosystems and human food production systems. Protecting wild—yet fragile—ecosystems is a demanding imperative.  Even more demanding, however, is making human food production systems thrive:  not merely protecting them from the pressures of population growth but ensuring that  they continue to facilitate this growth.      In recent years, the enhancement of agroecology, which draws on pre-industrial  methods and practices with state-of-the-art digital technologies, has been heralded as  the path out of the threefold wicked problem of doing less with more for human food  production systems, while fostering biodiversity and natural habitats (De Schutter,  2011; Maurel & Huyghe, 2017; Wezel et al., 2020). However, aside of pragmatic  qualms concerning the feasibility of such aspirations and a host of ethical, political and economic barriers, the question emerges whether agroecology and the digital agricultural revolution draw on different paradigms of thought and practice, or  whether they are ultimately encompassed by the same “world-picture.” In order to  engage with the real-world problems that digital agroecology is expected to solve and  in order to make sense of the quagmire of normative ethical questions it generates,  it is necessary to address first the theoretical question concerning the possibility of a  convergence between agroecology and the digital.      To achieve this, the article opens with an outline of agroecology’s scope and  evolution (Sect. "Introduction"). It proceeds to set into relief the key differences  between agroecology and “agromodernism,” a term coined in direct parallel to “ecomodernism,” to encompass the paradigm guiding the industrial and digital agricultural revolutions. Agroecology and agromodernism are accordingly understood as  opposing “frames” of discourse, each generating distinctive sub-frames pertaining  to rights, epistemological evidence and the role of technology (Sect. "Agroecology:  Scope and Evolution"). As discursive formations and practices, agroecology and  agromodernism constitute modes of knowledge and rules of operation that possess a  unique historical objectivity (Foucault, 2002, 131). At the same time, the two objective frames correspond to different subjective views. The article undertakes therefore  to show the difference between the agroecological and the agromodernist mindsets,  which include normative values and beliefs, as well as psycho-affective dispositions  (Sect. "Frames and Sub-frames: Agroecology and Agromodernism").      This analysis, drawing directly on existing thematic literature, offers a clear  account of the contrasting ways in which agroecology and agromodernism frame  the world and condition the human view on it. However, there is a dearth of explicit  theoretical reflection concerning the common presuppositions of agroecology and  agromodernism. The article supplements this paucity (Sect. "Viewing the Frame: The  Agroecological Mind"), by drawing on Martin Heidegger (Sect. 4.1), Jean-François  Lyotard (Sect. 4.2) and Frédéric Neyrat (Sect. 4.3), three prominent philosophers
 of technology who have sustained an incisive thread of inquiry across the span of  the past century on the ways in which technoscience—including industrial-digital  agriculture—produces not merely specific objects, but the world as a whole. Their  analyses help recognise a specific configuration of the world and of the human,  which becomes the converging horizon of both agroecology and agromodernism.  The implications of this convergence are far-reaching for agriculture and must be  seriously considered if agroecology is not to be co-opted by agromodernism. The  article thus closes by drawing out some of these implications and considering the  future of an other, “inhuman” agroecology (Sect. "The Technoscientific Operation:  Constructing the World and the Human"). The term “inhuman” does not refer to mere  cruelty or violence, but points beyond all that is pernicious—including cruelty and  violence—in the human. This thought-provoking tension at the heart of the term is  part of its discursive provenance and scope, as will become apparent in what follows.
 Agroecology: Scope and Evolution
 If there is any consensus on the semantic and practical scope of agroecology, it  amounts to the admission that there are many “agroecologies” constantly re-signified and co-produced, from actors with different values, intentions and worldviews  (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 2; Loconto & Fouilleux, 2019; Méndez et al., 2012;  Rivera-Ferre, 2018). Indeed, agroecology appears to incorporate elements of sustainable agriculture, conservation agriculture and regenerative agriculture, without  being strictly identifiable with these movements. Similarly, agroecology often adopts  organic or biodynamic practices, without having analogous certification criteria and  protocols and the added market value of such labelling.     The principles of agroecology have evolved over time as its scope expanded from  field to farm to the whole food system. A milestone was set when the UN’s HighLevel Panel of Experts (HLPE) for Food Security and Nutrition encapsulated the  agroecological approach in thirteen principles: recycling, input reduction, soil health,  animal health, biodiversity, synergy, economic diversification, co-creation of knowledge, social values and diets, fairness, connectivity, land and natural governance,  and participation (HLPE, 2019). Since then, additional principles have been proposed in literature, aiming to incorporate aspects such as specific practices, sociocultural dimensions and farming systems (Wezel et al., 2020). One such example  (Sect. "Agroecology: Scope and Evolution"), is the addition of the principle of fostering agroecological mindsets (Soini Coe & Coe, 2023).     Agroecology can be moreover understood as a “transdisciplinary approach that  embraces science, a set of practices and a social movement” (Wezel et al., 2020). It  aims at the creation of sustainable food systems which are beneficial for both local  communities and ecosystems. To do so, it leverages natural processes within agroecosystems to produce beneficial synergistic relationships and enhance economic  sustainability of rural areas. Emphasizing short marketing chains and safe food production methods, agroecology supports smallholder food production methods, food  sovereignty, social justice, local identity and indigenous rights concerning seeds and  breeds (Wezel et al., 2020).
     Agroecology has been routinely dismissed as unrealistic and unviable, with the  “feed the world” narrative used to privilege industrial agriculture over ecological  production of lower yields. (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 2; cf. Fouilleux et al.,  2017, Bellwood-Howard & Ripoll, 2020). Nonetheless, through tireless promotion of  its sustainability and social justice merits to policy makers, agroecology has gradually entered the mainstream (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 1). Notwithstanding its  promise, however, this development invites fears of co-optation by dominant market  and policy agents threatening to rob the movement of its transformative potential  (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 2; cf. Levidow et al., 2014; Laforge et al., 2016).      Much of the contestation over the place and future of agroecology centres around  innovation. While for many innovation promises a salutary combination of agroecology and technology, others see it as the trojan horse for the co-optation of agroecology. Thematised by Joseph Schumpeter as “doing things differently” (2005, p.  84), innovation has always been integral to the modern developmental paradigm. In  recent years, its significance has been encapsulated in OECD’s “innovation imperative” (2015), virtually an ultimatum to innovate or perish (Anderson & Maughan,  2021, p. 3).      The dictum echoes the double imperative that drove the third agricultural revolution: a mass utilisation of mechanisation, chemical pesticides and fertilisers on the  one hand and of consolidation into ever larger monocultural holdings, on the other.  The effects of this development are most tellingly summarised in the fact that while  equipment and chemicals became more powerful and the average American farm size  increased manyfold during the twentieth century, the reduced numbers of mechanised, large-scale farmers that survived to reap the benefits, earned less than their  great-grandparents when adjusting for inflation (Shepard, 2013). Ecosystems fared  no better. It is thus unsurprising that the innovation imperative of the fourth agricultural revolution has met with scepticism. Critique points out that claims of social and  ecological benefits of technologies are often unsubstantiated (Miles, 2019), while  negative impacts, including impacts on labour and agricultural communities are  downplayed or altogether ignored (Barrett & Rose, 2021).      Admittedly, numerous attempts have been made to reconceptualise innovation in  “responsible” ways, summed up in calls for inclusive innovation, grassroots innovation, social innovation, retro innovation, coupled innovation, as well as agroecological  innovation. Nonetheless, innovation remains for many attached to an agromodernist  “logic of productivism and accumulation” and thus incompatible with agroecology  (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 3).
 Frames and Sub-Frames: Agroecology and Agromodernism
 An exemplary contestation of agroecology and agromodernism over agricultural policy took place during the consultation process initiated by HLPE in the Committee  on World Food Security (CFS) as well as during parallel developments in UN’s Food  and Agriculture Organization (FAO), which ultimately led to the evocatively titled  report “Agroecology and Other Innovations” (HLPE, 2019). To examine this discursive contestation, frame analysis (Snow & Benford, 1992; Steinberg, 1998) provides
 invaluable insight into the political-ideological agendas that informed the discussion and positioning of different states (Anderson & Maughan, 2021). For present  purposes what matters is the discursive coalescing of all positions into the frames of  agroecology and agromodernism, which in view of the role of innovation branched  into three further sub-frames concerning i. rights, ii. epistemological evidence and  iii. technology. In the following three paragraphs a brief overview of each sub-frame  outlines the overall differences of the two main frames.      Firstly, concerning the sub-frame of rights, it became clear that agromodernism  considers the choice from a full range of innovative products as a right of the farmers,  who are primarily seen as business owners, and the staunch protection of intellectual  property as the cornerstone right of technology developers. To these “market” rights,  agroecology opposes more fundamental human rights, foregrounding the rights of the  most affected and striving for food sovereignty (Loconto & Fouilleux, 2019). This  was reflected in HLPE’s final report, which after the consultation round promoted  human rights into the “basis for ensuring sustainable food systems” (Anderson &  Maughan, 2021, p. 11). Although this emphasis was watered down during the implementation stage, it constituted a victory for agroecology, which considers communal  modes of living and agricultural knowledge as deserving of equal protection to ecosystems. The above makes clear that socially, as much as ecologically, agroecology  is distinct from agromodernist movements such as smart agriculture and sustainable  intensification (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 12; Pimbert, 2017).      Secondly, the subframe of evidence revolved around what constitutes reliable  agricultural knowledge to justify the adoption of innovation processes. In contrast to  well-established metrics for economic and yield performance, agroecology is commonly critiqued as failing to provide measurements for social, cultural, political and  ecological outcomes (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 6). Even when the significance  of aspects such as the farmers’ well-being is acknowledged, the absence of corresponding quantifiable indicators is used to sideline such considerations (Anderson  & Maughan, 2021, p. 7). Thus, during the consultation process of the HLPE report  opponents of agroecology prioritised the measurable indicators of GDP and farm  income, considering farmers primarily as “business owners,” rather than “ecological  stewards, community members, and knowledge producers” (Anderson & Maughan,  2021, p. 7). In contrast, proponents of agroecology called for critical reflection on the  role indicators play in informing policy over more holistic considerations, such as  mental health, nutritional value, biodiversity and resilience (Anderson & Maughan,  2021, p. 7).      Finally, the stakes regarding innovation became most apparent in the sub-frame of  technology. For agromodernism, innovation is nearly synonymous with technological progress, which conditions in turn social change (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p.  8). For agroecology, in contrast, innovation is decoupled from technology, as agricultural innovation has been at work for thousands of years, in an ongoing dialogue with  social and ecological developments (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 9). A straw man  is often made of agroecology’s reserve towards technology, as when, for example, the  “Cornell Alliance for Science,” founded by the Gates Foundation to promote biotechnology in Africa, denigrated agroecology as hostile to science and rationality and as a  barrier to the farmers’ right to access innovations (Conrow, 2020). Similarly common
 is to mobilise agroecology’s values against it. Thus, during HLPE’s consultation process, traditional agroecological values such as attentiveness to local conditions and  resilience to climate change were evoked to promote biotechnological innovation.  To that effect, genetic modification, fiercely rejected by agroecology, was asserted as  a conducive path towards agroecological goals (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, p. 8).  Along the same lines, agromodernism touts technological innovation as being better  able to feed the world, make agriculture appealing to a younger demographic and  serve a host of other agroecological values. Agroecology responds that the persistent  equivocation of the innovation imperative with a moral imperative is sustained by the  agromodernist discourse in order to promote top-down, profit-driven technologies  with little interest in the flourishing of farmers and ecosystems. In contrast, agroecology considers social innovation as potentially more important than technological  innovation, foregrounding farmers as knowledge innovators with a deep understanding of local conditions and in situ practices, from which the aims and modes of innovation must be decided collectively (Anderson & Maughan, 2021, pp. 9–10).      These differences demarcate starkly the two frames. To the agromodernist market  rights, agroecology opposes human, farmer and ecosystem rights and food sovereignty. Beyond the agromodernist focus on quantifiable indicators as sole reliable  scientific evidence, agroecology commits to the under-researched efficacy of local  and traditional modes of knowledge. Over the agromodernist understanding of innovation in exclusively technological terms, agroecology foregrounds the social dimension of innovation. As such, we can observe the normative differences between the  values and methods of the two paradigms. While however normative traditions such  as deontology and consequentialism would proceed from a prior ethical commitment  towards an attempt to determine the most ethical agricultural practice, a discursive  frame analysis examines the real-world conditions in which such normative commitments can emerge. As such, agroecology and agromodernism can be equally championed by deontology and consequentialism on the basis of a distinctive framing of the  world. Moreover, individuals and institutions may shift their commitment to specific  elements of each frame, despite being broadly aligned with either. Such volatility is  tampered when discursive embeddedness is coupled with a rigorous subjective mindset, as the section below details.
 Viewing the Frame: The Agroecological Mind
 Having outlined the objective discourse frames of agromodernism and agroecology,  it is possible to identify subjective differences which lead individuals to espouse each  frame. In their research, Eija Soini Coe and Richard Coe adopt the term “mindset”  to refer to the normative values, beliefs, motivations, and attitudes that underlie a  person’s decisions and actions (Soini Coe & Coe, 2023, p. 2). They define mindsets  as “deep, assumed patterns of thinking that shape how we make sense of the world”  (FrameWork Institute, 2020) and employ the term to encompass the four components  that inform the model of justified behaviour. The model, which was developed in  the context of education for responsible environmental behaviour entails four types  of factors exerting influence: i. motivational (values, beliefs, goals, etc.), ii. social
 (norms, roles, dynamics, etc.), iii. contextual (technology, geography, laws, etc.) and  finally iv. epistemic, as well as other resources (time, money, power, etc.) (Soini Coe  & Coe, 2023, p. 3). Although some of these factors can be also seen as objective discursive conditions, the model of justified behaviour focuses on “mindsets” to analyse  intra-personal perspectives also on extra- and inter-personal behavioural influences.     It is worth noting that mindsets have a particular import for normative ethics.  Despite not being conceptualised as such within the philosophical tradition, they  are readily identifiable with the subjective conditions that enable an individual to  espouse distinctive virtues in the rich sense developed within virtue ethics, that is, as  ethical traits that determine one’s comportment to the world. From within a mindset  theory, the normative claims of deontological or consequentialists values are neither  a priori, nor universal, but the result of subjectivation, the formation, that is, of an  ethical subject. From this perspective, a mindset is the space that a subject occupies  in order to relate to a discursive frame.     Accordingly, only a mindset transformation can destabilise “worldviews and  frames of reference,” which may be precipitated by: “a deeply touching positive  experience that allows one to see the world differently; a crisis that tests one’s abilities to cope and pushes one to look for alternative ways of thinking; a cumulation of  experience that leads to feeling something is wrong” (Soini Coe & Coe, 2023, 4). In  total, Soini Coe and Coe identify five core factors specific to the adoption of an agroecological mindset, briefly elaborated in the following paragraph: i. connection with  nature, ii. sense of place, iii. individual and group identity, iv. self- and social efficacy  as a spillover effect and v. other spillover effects: warm glow and pride.     i. Connection with nature is the principal factor in opposing an agromodernist  mindset, where nature figures as a resource to be exploited or a threat to be controlled.  Connecting with nature creates and enforces “symbiotic cognitive, affective, and  experiential traits that reflect, through consistent attitudes and behaviors, a sustained  awareness of the interrelatedness between one’s self and the rest of nature” (Zylstra et al., 2014). Thus, beyond and before the normative dimension of moral duty,  empathy—adopting nonhuman perspectives—and compassion—instinctively helping nonhumans—fashion an affective disposition of care towards other life forms and  ecosystems (Jax et al., 2018). ii. A sense of place, especially when strong enough to  inform one’s identity, is likely to make one attentive to signs of degradation (Chapin  et al., 2012) and thus motivate stewardship of a place. However, unless coupled with  other factors, a sense of place may also lend itself to a mindset of agromodernist  progress (Soini Coe & Coe, 2023, p. 5). iii. Identification with environmentalist or  agroecological groups, including the adoption of such descriptions for oneself, reinforces corresponding values and behaviours (Fritsche et al., 2018). This can forge  feedback loops of identification and commitment to an agroecological mindset. iv.  Self-efficacy in the sense of the power and freedom to act is also important for putting  knowledge and skills to work. Even small achievements—whether individual or collective—can have the “spillover effect” of enhancing a sense of self-efficacy (Soini  Coe & Coe, 2023, p. 6). v. Finally, affects such as pride and satisfaction in doing “the  right thing,” can have spillover effects, consolidating an agroecological ethos. However, such affects may also thwart further action if taken as confirmation of sufficient  contribution to the problem (Meijers et al., 2013).
    Aside of the fact that some of these factors are non-exclusive to an agroecological mindset and may in isolation veer into an agromodernist worldview, their overall  efficacy may also be disputed insofar as their translation into reality appears only  possible when environmental and economic motivations are coupled in “win–win  practices.” It may thus be objected that what matters is not mindsets, but the adoption  of practices (Foguesatto et al., 2019, p. 405). However, regardless of whether perfect,  “win–win” solutions exist at all, there is little doubt that agroecological mindsets will  aid the adoption of agroecological practices and the amplification of the agroecological discourse. To that effect, Soini Coe and Coe propose the addition of fostering such  mindsets to the aforementioned thirteen widely accepted agroecological principles  (Soini Coe & Coe, 2023, p. 7). What they aspire to, through such cultivation of an  agroecological mindset, is the transformation of homo economicus into homo ecologicus, an ethically virtuous person that sympathises, respects and draws inspiration  from their experience of nature (Becker, 2006).     There is little doubt that this normative call for a knowledge and management of  humanity in the service of nature is preferable to the management of nature in the  service of humanity. However, even in this noble aspiration, the welfare of nature is  conditional upon the cultivation, that is the production and management of ourselves,  as humans (Massy, 2017; Soini Coe & Coe, 2023, p. 9). This construction of the  human as a parallel to the technoscientific construction of the world is where agroecology and agromodernism meet. The following section explores this convergence.
 The Technoscientific Operation: Constructing the World and the  Human
 The fault lines between agroecology and industrial agriculture are now clear, both as  objective discursive frames and as subjective mindsets through which these frames  are viewed. What must be in turn examined are the tacitly shared presuppositions of  the two frames. In order to do so, this section will analyse three interrelated theoretical perspectives on the role of technoscience in the simultaneous configuration of the  world and the human. The implications of this exposition for agroecology will be  drawn in the subsequent section.
 The World as Picture: Heidegger
 “Technoscience” refers not merely to the parallel or mutually enhancing operations  of technology and science, but to their reciprocal constitution. For Martin Heidegger,  modern science is marked by a constant activity, which does not merely aim to understand what is immutable in the world, but to steer the world’s becoming, predicting  the future and retrodicting the past of all that exists (Heidegger, 2002, p. 63). The  complicity of technics and science is here paramount. Modern technics is able to  transform the world because it is premised on a scientific apparatus that knows better  than ever before, while modern science in turn knows better than ever before because  it is premised on a technical apparatus capable of transforming the world. In this  cyclical, interminable operation technoscience changes the world it knows and to
 that extent knows the world it changes. Research is thus able to bring beings under  an unprecedented level of control and, proving itself time and again successful in its  results, gradually turns its incessant activity into an end in itself (Heidegger, 2002,  p. 74).      For Heidegger the result of this process is twofold: on the one hand, the world—  that is, nature as much as history—becomes picture, while on the other, the human  becomes subject (Heidegger, 2002, p. 69). Accordingly, a world-picture is not one  among many pictures of the world, but rather the world understood as picture offering itself to a human subject (Heidegger, 2002, p. 67), which can behold and manipulate it from its own unique viewpoint. Accordingly, a worldview [Weltanschauung],  is the view of the world-picture that a subject enjoys from their position (Heidegger,  2002, p. 70). This is precisely the correspondence of frames and mindsets elucidated  in the preceding analysis. In this development, where the position of the subject can  only be occupied by the human, it becomes increasingly impossible to conceive an  access to the world that is not anthropological, i.e. premised on the human gaze and  evaluated in accordance with the human positionality (Heidegger, 2002, p. 70).      Importantly, in this analysis, there is no ancient or medieval world picture—-the  becoming-picture of the world is constitutive of modernity (Heidegger, 2002, p. 68).  Technoscience as a uniquely modern phenomenon constructs the world as “picture,”  that is, “the collective image of representing production,” for which the human is the  exclusive measure and arbiter (Heidegger, 2002, p. 71). This is precisely because science represents the world in line with the way in which technics produces it. Thus,  the world is gradually constructed as the stage on which the human can lead the  drama of its self-determination, the sham fulfilment of what the human was bound—  freely yet inescapably—to become (Heidegger, 2002, p. 81).      In this process, objects are valued in direct proportion to their serving as props or  means the needs of human self-determination and the ongoing transformation of the  world into picture. Hence, Heidegger dismisses values as “the powerless and threadbare mask of the objectification of beings, an objectification that has become flat and  devoid of background. No one dies for mere values” (Heidegger, 2002, 77). Values  cannot proclaim what the world or the human might be, because they are themselves  products of the technoscientific “enframing” [Gestell]—part, that is, of the transformation of the world into picture and of the human as its master. Accordingly, any  normative postulation of values, to the extent that it remains constitutively anthropological, is bound to foreclose the potentialities of both the world and the human.      This diagnosis of technoscience, offered by Heidegger during the years of postwar  “reconstruction,” an integral part of which was the third agricultural revolution, was  further elaborated by Jean-François Lyotard in the latter part of the twentieth century.
 Two Senses of the Inhuman: Lyotard
 Expanding on Heidegger’s diagnosis, Lyotard sees modernity as a relentless striving  for efficiency through more reliable, capacious and suppler regulation. It is mediation and thus alienation of the regulated elements—living and non-living alike—that  enables the coordination of an ever more complex web of modifications and permutations (Lyotard, 1991, p. 6). This process of increasing complexification (faster,
 more capable machines, evermore tightly connected and seamlessly coordinated with  other faster, more capable machines) has no finality: it is not guided by the plan of  a supreme being or by the telos of an Idea, such as the emancipation of reason or  human freedom, despite the circumstantial use it makes of such normative ethical  values and existential principles, leading to the illusion of human self-determination.  Importantly, although this logic has no telos, its self-contained dynamic has a limit:  the entropic end of the solar system (Lyotard, 1991, p. 7).     This “pure” event is critical for Lyotard, because it poses a hard limit to the understanding of thought as a uniquely human quest of interminable progress and progression (Lyotard, 1991, p. 9). While “human death is included in the life of human  mind,” solar death implicates the eclipse of all thought, not merely provisionally or  temporarily, but definitively. Thinking the solar death means thinking the constitutive  disjunction of thought from reality—a thought beyond what classical philosophy can  conceptualise. Technoscience is, however, prepared to venture beyond the horizon of  the human project by dissociating thinking from its material conditions. For Lyotard,  “this and this alone is what’s at stake today in technical and scientific research in  every field from dietetics […] to particle physics […]” (Lyotard, 1991, p. 12).     However, solar death is arguably neither the ultimate nor the sole limit of the  human project: at one end, an interstellar human emigration is a staple of technoscientific fiction; at the other end, the imminent threat of a collapse of the material  conditions of all life presents itself with relentless force. It is, indeed, this threat of  ecologic collapse that informs the debate around agroecology and invites the present revisiting of Lyotard, by postulating a limit that is neither merely biological,  nor—contra Lyotard—cosmic; it is, rather, a uniquely terrestrial limit. The earth as  a planetary body is not in danger; the earth as the locus of life and the totality of its  conditions, is.     The role of technology in the face of this terrestrial limit is critical. For Lyotard,  as for André Leroi-Ghouran before him and Bernard Stiegler after, technology antecedes the emergence of the human. Importantly, Lyotard understands technology in  cybernetic terms, i.e. as the capacity of any material system to retain and employ  information in order to impact the environment and procure the desired results, ultimately aiding the system’s perpetuation. In this sense, all life is technological. The  human partakes in the technology of life but amplifies its complexity through the  creation of symbolic informational systems. Such systems are semantically and syntactically arbitrary and thus detachable from their material conditions (“a rose by  any other name would smell as sweet” in the famous Shakespeare line) as well as  recursive, affording the reconfiguration of their operational rules in the face of novel  input (more complex and capable grammatical structures and elaborate vocabularies  to accommodate new linguistic needs) (Lyotard, 1991, p. 12). Digital technologies  raise this human capacity for complexity to a new order of magnitude, as machine  recursivity becomes ever more efficient at incorporating data to improve its structural conditions of operation. Thus, machines outdo humans in the capacity that they,  amongst all life, excelled. For Lyotard this process leads inexorably to “Cartesian  modernism,” the abandonment of life’s material corporeality, as matter becomes ultimately a hindrance to thought, “its inert mass, stupidity” (Lyotard, 1991, p. 38).
    However, for Lyotard the embodiment of human—and more generally biological—intelligence is not an unfortunate limitation, but what makes every intelligence  unique. Following Hubert Dreyfus, Lyotard notes that human thought is not premised  on a binary code, but operates, always imprecisely, through intuition and hypothesis  in an ambiguous environment, collecting “data” which have not been pre-configured according to a protocol of readability. This collection process is not unwaveringly focused, but also lateral and thus open to the marginal (Lyotard, 1991, p. 15).  Embodied thought does not transcribe the perceptible world onto an external recording substrate but rather finds itself enmeshed in a world that composes, sustains and  determines it (Lyotard, 1991, p. 17). Since the perceivable appears always inexhaustible in the past, present and future, embodied thought remains phenomenologically  open. The body, in all its aspects, including sexual difference, is an inextinguishable  source, generating infinite thought, infinite action, infinite memory. Out of these lineaments corporeal affect becomes imagination.     For Lyotard, however, human history is an unfaltering attempt to overcome the  universal conditions that compose yet at the same time limit living intelligence.  Education offers a micrography of this process as children, perpetually riveted by  physical frailty and intellectual naivety are ushered into the secure community of  adult reason (Lyotard, 1991, pp. 3–4). This constitutes a passage from the exemplary  “humanity” of childhood, strongly attached to corporeal affect and thus imagination,  into the space of “inhuman” reason, the abstract informational space into which the  human as a technological-symbolic species has a privileged access among all life.     The “age of reason” encapsulate thus in developmental terms what modern technoscience effects historically: the intensification and autonomisation of inhuman reason  which turns intelligence against its constitutively human embodiment. This historic  process is still incomplete. For Lyotard its completion would require machines to  think, or rather imagine, which in turn would require that the information that constitutes their contact point with the world be construed not as “data,” that is, as “given,”  already established facts about the world, but as an open letting-arrive of the indeterminable (Lyotard, 1991, p. 18). Perhaps the future will be able to create incorporeal  systems able to welcome indetermination. At the present juncture of terrestrial collapse, however, this dream of technoscientific disembodiment generates and sustains  merely an inhumanity “of development” (Lyotard, 1991, p. 2). This is an inhumane  and dehumanising inhumanity which strives to not to exceed, but to disintegrate the  conditions of human existence.     Before examining the implications of this inhuman tendency of technoscientific  reason for agriculture (Sect. "The Technoscientific Operation: Constructing the World  and the Human"), it is worth adding a twenty-first century inflection to the preceding  analysis, through Frédéric Neyrat’s notion of the “unconstructible.”
 The Unconstructible: Neyrat
 For Neyrat, modern technoscience advances a double operation: first, nature is construed as external to the human and subjected to a quantifying-codifying rationality  and second, nature is appropriated as a factor of production. This “organisation of
 nature” by technoscience means that the latter is not merely operating on nature, but  rather that nature is working for technoscience (Neyrat, 2021, pp. 3–4).     What makes the world “inhuman” and life well-neigh unliveable, is precisely that  the world is “human, all too human” (Neyrat, 2021, pp. 8–9). As such, Neyrat’s diagnosis, linking Heidegger to Lyotard is that we suffer not due to a deficit, but an excess  of humanity; what is deficient is the “inhuman” element, “that which does not ask to  be built, that which does not ask to become, that which does not beg to be connected,  or even to be empowered” (Neyrat, 2021, p. 9). In effect, Neyrat proposes that one  sense of Lyotard’s “inhuman” be turned against the other. To combat the ubiquitous  inhumane cruelty towards all life, including other humans, one must resist the production of the world, one must become “inhuman” (Neyrat, 2021, p. 8).     Neyrat considers the “inhuman” more apt than the “nonhuman” for a conceptual  resistance to modernity. For while the “nonhuman” refers to all forms of intelligence  and life beside the human, the “inhuman” is found “at the core of every human being  as what refuses to be shaped and reshaped” (Neyrat, 2021, p. 8). This is for Neyrat  Lyotard’s lesson, exposing in the human an unconstructible dimension which resists  the humanist and post-humanist forces of effective constructivism (Neyrat, 2021, p.  3), which mobilise human indetermination to stage the heroic drama of human selfdetermination. The inhuman is thus neither an external disruptive event (e.g. a comet  or earthquake), nor an “ancestral” monstrous force composing reality (e.g. planetary  homeostasis driving extinctions), but a constitutive, abiding dimension of the human,  amounting to a certain negation of agency, a certain inoperativity, the capacity to contemplate nothingness (Neyrat, 2021, pp. 7–8). This capacity affords the human access  to “mystery,” not what is extraneous to knowledge, but what resists knowledge and  our desire to know and possess (Coccia, 2024, p. 37).     Allowing a space for the inhuman is for Neyrat “one of the challenges of the  ecopolitics to come” (Neyrat, 2021, p. 8). This requires opening up a third domain  between the familiar antinomy or dilemma between merging and segregating nature  and society. For Neyrat, this dilemma is premised on the abstraction of nature by  effective constructivism, which facilitates the conceptual incorporation of nature in  technoscientific circuits of production, as well as its apparent opposite—the banishment of nature from all that is relevant to human reality (Neyrat, 2021, p. 4). The  same abstraction sees the nonhuman solely in “negotiation” with the human, foreclosing the possibility of its independence (Neyrat, 2021, pp. 5–7). What the inhuman  makes apparent is that the human does not exist “in” nature, just like nature cannot  be encompassed “within” the technoscientific frame which transforms the world into  a picture. Rather, the human exists with and depends on the nonhuman which does  not depend on it in turn; there is no symmetry between the human and the nonhuman  (Neyrat, 2021, p. 5).     Having examined Lyotard’s inflection of Heidegger’s and Lyotard’s operation of  modern technoscience, it is now possible appraise some of the implications of the  preceding elaboration for the future of agriculture.
 Implications: Inhuman Agroecologies
 man against the inhumane is for Lyotard the sole meaningful political gesture in late  modernity. This is a normative precept that does not readily fall within the existing  boundaries of ethically normative theories.      Neyrat develops this diagnosis, foregrounding the notion of in/constructability.  The inhuman is here that dimension of the human that does not strive to construct the  world. The inhuman thus keeps open a space where the nonhuman is allowed to break  through, establish itself and thrive. This may support the decolonisation of nature,  which for Neyrat consists in de-growth and deceleration (Neyrat, 2021, p. 6) but may  also entail re-wilding and re-generation. Under these headings, strong movements  coalesce today with well-articulated policy demands. Importantly, such demands may  be made with either the human or the inhuman in sight. Rewilding, for example, may  proceed from a “human” vantage point, insofar as it offers “ecosystem services,” that  is, helps the human economy, mental wellbeing and ultimately survival of humans.  As such, rewilding may or may not prove compatible with specific configurations  of classical normative models, like utilitarianism. However, rewilding may also be  undertaken in the service of the inhuman. This will entail a recognition of the irreducible significance of the living and non-living beings that compose the rewilded space,  as well as of the significance of the rewilded space that opens up within the human  through such a process—a space of imagination (cf. Monbiot, 2013).      Rewilding and agroecology are not commonly twined, but the inhuman makes  it difficult to ignore their nexus. This is certainly a policy matter, as it is a matter of  grassroot movements and agroecological practice. At every turn, the inhuman generates a shift of emphasis and perspective. Importantly, emancipation cannot be left to  the emancipators but must first and foremost be driven by the emancipated. It is the  agroecologists who must drive policy.      However, as the beginning of the analysis noted (Sect. "Introduction"), the space of  agroecology is fragmented. Some agroecologists will remain bound to humanist constructability. Nonetheless, a space of inhuman agroecologies can be claimed. From  it, policy and practice can shift. If, for example, the majority of current technological innovations aim at furthering efficiency gains such as workload reduction, rather  than benefiting the environment (Gabriel & Gandorfer, 2023, p. 78), agroecology  must labour towards creating meaningful practices that are not merely comfortable,  convenient and conducive to the human. Masanobu Fukuoka’s One-Straw Revolution—one of the most influential agroecological texts avant la lettre—details what  an agricultural practice that foregrounds the unconstructible, looks like (Fukuoka,  1978[1975]). Fukuoka calls this “do-nothing” agriculture, yet those who came to  live, study and work with him were surprised to discover that his methods involve  gruelling labour. The point is not to facilitate idleness or leisure, but to develop an  agricultural disposition marked by reserve and circumspection, allowing nature to  have the first and last word.      Fukuoka’s vision on agriculture may be contested. If, however, agriculture is to  be genuinely ecological, it must be able to discover and respect within and without the human, something that is altogether other and may potentially turn against  the human. As the most prominent agroecologist, Stephen R Gliessman, observes:  “farming with nature rather than against her is a foundational component of how  we as agroecologists think” (Gliessman, 2022, p. 163). Working with nature means
 discovering the unconstructible part in it. By the same token, it means discovering  the inhuman part in oneself.
 Conclusion
 The preceding analysis showed the clash of agromodernist and agroecological discursive frames and mindsets, while also showing the common ground they share  insofar as they are implicated in the technoscientific enframing of the world, a world  which is offered to a human subject to construct. This analysis is not an abstruse  theoretical exercise; its stakes are as pressing as they are high. Lyotard’s summary is  on point (Lyotard, 1991, pp. 53–54):
     When you can simulate in vitro the explosion of the sun or the fertilization or      gestation of a living creature, you have to decide what you want. And we just      don’t know. This foreclosure of ends […] has been dressed up in all sorts of      disguises: destination of man, progress, enlightenment, emancipation, happiness. Today this foreclosure appears naked. More knowledge and power, yes      — but why, no.
 As received humanist values seem no longer able to sustain the human project, let  alone afford it clear orientation, attending to the inhuman may be the only salutary  path. Agroecology is one of the few practices where care for the inhuman can find  clear expression and make a decisive difference. Its adoption of new digital technologies cannot be a one-way street into which agroecology is coerced by “pragmatic”  policies. Such technologies should not merely provide more “knowledge and power”  to farmers, but serve to attune their attentiveness to the inhuman, foregrounding the  flourishing of the unconstructible within and beyond the farm.
 Acknowledgments This paper has greatly profited from the insights of Prof Vincent Blok and Dr Roel  Veraart to whom I am indebted.
 Declarations
 Conflict of Interest The author participates in the EU-funded PATH2DEA project, with the objective of  enabling agroecology through digitalisation. The article is not funded directly by the project; the author  declares no conflicts of interest regarding this article.
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,  which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long  as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative  Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this  article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line  to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use  is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission  directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​  s​e​s​/​b​y​/​4​.​0​/​​​​.​​
 References  Anderson, C. R., & Maughan, C. (2021). ‘The innovation imperative’: The struggle over agroecology in        the international food policy arena. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​8​9​/​        f​s​u​f​s​.​2​0​2​1​.​6​1​9​1​8​5​​​​  Balafoutis, A. T., Evert, F. K. V., & Fountas, S. (2020). Smart farming technology trends: Economic and        environmental effects, labor impact, and adoption readiness. Agronomy, 10, Article 743. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​        o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​9​0​/​a​g​r​o​n​o​m​y​1​0​0​5​0​7​4​3​​​​  Barrett, H., & Rose, D. C. (2021). Perceptions of the fourth agricultural revolution: What’s in, what’s out,        and what consequences are anticipated? Sociologia Ruralis, 62(2), 1–28. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​s​o​        r​u​.​1​2​3​2​4​​​​  Becker, C. (2006). The human actor in ecological economics: Philosophical approach and research perspectives. Ecological Economics, 60(1), 17–23. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​e​c​o​l​e​​c​o​n​.​2​0​​0​5​.​1​​2​.​0​1​6  Bellwood-Howard, I., & Ripoll, S. (2020). Divergent understandings of agroecology in the era of the African        green revolution. Outlook on Agriculture, 49, 103–110. https://doi.org/10.1177/0030727020930353  Blok, V. (2017). Earthing technology: Towards an eco-centric concept of biomimetic technologies in the        Anthropocene. Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology, 21(2/3), 127–149. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​        0​.​5​8​4​0​/​t​e​c​h​n​e​2​0​1​7​5​2​3​6​3​​​​  Chapin, F. S., Mark, A. F., Mitchell, R. A., & Dickinson, K. J. (2012). Design principles for social-ecological transformation toward sustainability: Lessons from New Zealand sense of place. Ecosphere, 3(5),        40. https://doi.org/10.1890/ES12-00009.1  Coccia, E. (2024). Philosophy of the home: Domestic space and happiness. Penguin.  Conrow, J. (2020). Agroecology must be based in reality, not romanticism. Cornell Alliance Sci. Available        at: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​a​l​l​​i​a​n​c​e​f​​o​r​s​c​​i​e​n​c​e​​.​c​o​r​n​​e​l​l​.​e​d​​u​/​b​l​​o​g​/​2​0​​2​0​/​1​0​​/​a​g​r​o​e​​c​o​l​o​​g​y​-​m​u​​s​t​-​b​e​​-​b​a​s​e​d​​-​i​n​-​​r​e​a​l​i​​t​y​-​n​o​​t​r​o​        m​a​n​​t​i​c​i​​s​m​-​p​a​n​e​l​i​s​t​s​-​a​g​r​e​e​/  Foguesatto, C. R., Borges, J. A. R., & Machado, J. A. D. (2019). Farmers’ typologies regarding environmental values and climate change: Evidence from southern Brazil. Journal of Cleaner Production,        232, 400–407. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​1​6​/​j​.​​j​c​l​e​p​​r​o​.​2​0​1​​9​.​0​5​​.​2​7​5  Foucault, M. (2002). Archaeology of knowledge. Routledge.  Fouilleux, E., Bricas, N., & Alpha, A. (2017). ‘Feeding 9 billion people’: Global food security debates and        the productionist trap. Journal of European Public Policy, 24(11), 1658–1677. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​        8​0​/​1​3​​5​0​1​7​6​​3​.​2​0​1​7​​.​1​3​3​​4​0​8​4  Fritsche, I., Barth, M., Jugert, P., Masson, T., & Reese, G. (2018). A social identity model of pro-environmental action (SIMPEA). Psychological Review, 125(2), 245–269. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​3​7​/​r​e​v​0​0​0​0​        0​9​0​​​​  Fukuoka, M. (1978). The one-straw revolution. Rodale Press.  Gabriel, A., & Gandorfer, M. (2023). Adoption of digital technologies in agriculture: An inventory in a        European small-scale farming region. Precision Agriculture, 24, 68–91. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​        1​1​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​9​9​3​1​-​1​​​​  Gliessman, S. (2022). Balancing nature and agriculture. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems,        46(2), 163–164. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​/​/​d​o​i​​.​o​r​g​/​1​​0​.​1​0​​8​0​/​2​1​​6​8​3​5​6​​5​.​2​0​2​2​​.​2​0​0​​9​1​7​1  Heidegger, M. (2002). The age of the world picture. Off the beaten track (pp. 57–85). Cambridge University Press.  Agroecological and other innovative approaches for sustainable agriculture and food systems that enhance        food security and nutrition. Rome: CFS high level panel of experts.  FrameWork Institute. 2020. Mindset shifts: What are they? Why do they matter? How do they happen?        FrameWork Institute.  Jax, K., Calestani, M., Chan, K. M., Eser, U., Keune, H., et al. (2018). Caring for nature matters: A relational approach for understanding nature’s contributions to human. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 35, 22–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2018.10.009  Kohler, T. A., Smith, M. E., Bogaard, A., et al. (2017). Greater post-neolithic wealth disparities in Eurasia        than in North America and Mesoamerica. Nature, 551(7682), 619–622.  Laforge, J. M. L., Anderson, C. R., & McLachlan, S. M. (2016). Governments, grassroots, and the struggle        for local food systems: Containing, coopting, contesting and collaborating. Agriculture and Human        Values, 34, 663–681. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-016-9765-5
 Larsen, C. S. (2006). The agricultural revolution as environmental catastrophe: Implications for health       and lifestyle in the holocene. Quaternary International, 150(1), 12–20. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​q​u​       a​i​n​t​.​2​0​0​6​.​0​1​.​0​0​4​​​​  Levidow, L., Pimbert, M., & Vanloqueren, G. (2014). Agroecological research: Conforming—or transforming the dominant agro-food regime? Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 38(10), 1127–       1155. https://doi.org/10.1080/21683565.2014.951459  Loconto, A. M., & Fouilleux, E. (2019). Defining agroecology. The International Journal of Sociology of       Agriculture and Food, 25, 116–137. https://doi.org/10.48416/ijsaf.v25i2.27  Lyotard, J.-F. (1991). The inhuman: reflections on time. Stanford University Press.  Massy, C. (2017). Call of the reed warbler. Chelsea Green Publishing.  Maurel, V. B., & Huyghe, C. (2017). Putting agricultural equipment and digital technologies at the cutting       edge of agroecology. Ocl, 24, Article D307. https://doi.org/10.1051/ocl/2017028  Meijers, M. H. C., Noordewier, M. K., & Avramova, Y. R. (2013). I just recycled, in Encouraging sustainable behavior: Psychology and the environment. Taylor and Francis.  Méndez, V. E., Bacon, C. M., & Cohen, R. (2012). Agroecology as a transdisciplinary, participatory, and       action-oriented approach. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 37(1), 3–18. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​       0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​0​4​4​0​0​4​6​.​2​0​1​2​.​7​3​6​9​2​6​​​​  Miles, C. (2019). The combine will tell the truth: On precision agriculture and algorithmic rationality. Big       Data & Society, 6(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951719849444  Monbiot, G. (2013). Feral: Searching for enchantment on the frontiers of rewilding. Penguin Books.  Neyrat, F. (2021). Dismantling the world: The capitalocene, effective constructivism, and the inhuman.       DasQuestões, 13(1), 2–11.  OECD. (2015). The innovation imperative: contributing to productivity, growth and well-being. OECD.  Pimbert, M. (2017). Agroecology as an alternative vision to conventional development and climate-smart       agriculture. Development (Cambridge, England), 58, 286–298. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​5​7​/​s​4​1​3​0​1​-​0​1​6​       -​0​0​1​3​-​5​​​​  Rivera-Ferre, M. G. (2018). The resignification process of agroecology: Competing narratives from governments, civil society and intergovernmental organizations. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 42(6), 666–685. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​​​/​​/​d​o​​i​.​o​r​​g​/​​1​0​.​​1​0​​8​0​/​​2​1​6​8​3​​​5​6​5​.​2​​​0​1​8​.​​1​4​3​7​4​9​8  Schumpeter, J. A. (2005). Business Cycles: a theoretical, historical, and statistical analysis of the capitalist process. Martino Publishing.  De Schutter, O. (2011). Agroecology and the right to food. Rep. Present. 16th Sess. U. N. Hum. Rights       Counc. AHRC1649 8.  Shepard, M. (2013). Restoration agriculture: real world permaculture for farmers. Acres U.S.A., Inc.  Snow, D. A., & Benford, R. D. (1992). Master frames and cycles of protest. In A. D. Morris & C. M. Mueller (Eds.), Frontiers in social movement theory (pp. 133–155). Yale University Press.  Soini Coe, E., & Coe, R. (2023). Agroecological transitions in the mind. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene. https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.2022.00026  Steinberg, M. W. (1998). Tilting the frame: Considerations on collective action framing from a discursive       turn. Theory and Society, 27, 845–872. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1006975321345  Stone, G. D. (2022). The agricultural dilemma: How not to feed the world. Routledge. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​       4​3​2​4​/​9​7​8​1​0​0​3​2​8​6​2​5​7​​​​  Wezel, A., Herren, B. G., Kerr, R. B., Barrios, E., Gonçalves, A. L. R., & Sinclair, F. (2020). Agroecological principles and elements and their implications for transitioning to sustainable food systems.       Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 40, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-020-00646-z  Zylstra, M. J., Knight, A. T., Esler, K. J., & Le Grange, L. L. (2014). Connectedness as a core conservation       concern: An interdisciplinary review of theory and a call for practice. Springer Science Reviews, 2,       119–143. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40362-014-0021-3
 Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps  and institutional affiliations.
                                                                                                                      13 Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved. Terms and Conditions Springer Nature journal content, brought to you courtesy of Springer Nature Customer Service Center GmbH (“Springer Nature”). Springer Nature supports a reasonable amount of sharing of research papers by authors, subscribers and authorised users (“Users”), for small-scale personal, non-commercial use provided that all copyright, trade and service marks and other proprietary notices are maintained. By accessing, sharing, receiving or otherwise using the Springer Nature journal content you agree to these terms of use (“Terms”). For these purposes, Springer Nature considers academic use (by researchers and students) to be non-commercial. These Terms are supplementary and will apply in addition to any applicable website terms and conditions, a relevant site licence or a personal subscription. These Terms will prevail over any conflict or ambiguity with regards to the relevant terms, a site licence or a personal subscription (to the extent of the conflict or ambiguity only). For Creative Commons-licensed articles, the terms of the Creative Commons license used will apply. We collect and use personal data to provide access to the Springer Nature journal content. We may also use these personal data internally within ResearchGate and Springer Nature and as agreed share it, in an anonymised way, for purposes of tracking, analysis and reporting. We will not otherwise disclose your personal data outside the ResearchGate or the Springer Nature group of companies unless we have your permission as detailed in the Privacy Policy. While Users may use the Springer Nature journal content for small scale, personal non-commercial use, it is important to note that Users may not:
use such content for the purpose of providing other users with access on a regular or large scale     basis or as a means to circumvent access control;  2. use such content where to do so would be considered a criminal or statutory offence in any     jurisdiction, or gives rise to civil liability, or is otherwise unlawful;  3. falsely or misleadingly imply or suggest endorsement, approval , sponsorship, or association     unless explicitly agreed to by Springer Nature in writing;  4. use bots or other automated methods to access the content or redirect messages  5. override any security feature or exclusionary protocol; or  6. share the content in order to create substitute for Springer Nature products or services or a     systematic database of Springer Nature journal content. In line with the restriction against commercial use, Springer Nature does not permit the creation of a product or service that creates revenue, royalties, rent or income from our content or its inclusion as part of a paid for service or for other commercial gain. Springer Nature journal content cannot be used for inter-library loans and librarians may not upload Springer Nature journal content on a large scale into their, or any other, institutional repository. These terms of use are reviewed regularly and may be amended at any time. Springer Nature is not obligated to publish any information or content on this website and may remove it or features or functionality at our sole discretion, at any time with or without notice. Springer Nature may revoke this licence to you at any time and remove access to any copies of the Springer Nature journal content which have been saved. To the fullest extent permitted by law, Springer Nature makes no warranties, representations or guarantees to Users, either express or implied with respect to the Springer nature journal content and all parties disclaim and waive any implied warranties or warranties imposed by law, including merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Please note that these rights do not automatically extend to content, data or other material published by Springer Nature that may be licensed from third parties. If you would like to use or distribute our Springer Nature journal content to a wider audience or on a regular basis or in any other manner not expressly permitted by these Terms, please contact Springer Nature at
onlineservice@springernature.com